# CE8491 LP

Title: Microsoft Word - CE8491-LP.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LessonPlan/CE8491-LP.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 05 Dec 2022 15:58:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
1 of 4 

# Mohamed Sathak A.J college of Engineering, Chennai. 

DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 

LESSON PLAN 

Course/Branch : B.E Civil Engineering Total no. of hours given in syllabus: 

Subject Code : CE8491 Lecture : 45 

Subject Title : SOIL MECHANICS Tutorials : 0

Year/Semester : II/ IV Practical : 0

Faculty Name : Mrs. V.Janaki TOTAL : 45 

Regulation : 2017 Credits : 03 

COURSE OBJECTIVES :

# The student should be made to: 

The objective of this course is to classify the soil based on index properties and to assess 

their engineering properties based on the classification. To familiarize the students about the 

fundamental concepts of compaction, flow through soil, stress transformation, stress distribution, 

consolidation and shear strength of soils. To impart knowledge of design of both finite and infinite 

slopes. 

COURSE OUTCOMES :

Upon completion of the course, the student should be able to: 

 Classify the soil and assess the engineering properties, based on index properties. 

 Understand the stress concepts in soils 

 Understand and identify the settlement in soils. 

 Determine the shear strength of soil 

 Analyze both finite and infinite slopes.  

> FORMAT NO: LP 01
> ISSUE NO: 1
> ISSUE DATE: 16 -03 -2022

2 of 4 

Sl.No. Topic No. of 

Periods 

Text / 

Reference 

Books 

Page No. Method 

UNIT I SOIL CLASSIFICATION AND COMPACTION 9

Objective: 

The objective of this unit is to help students to develop the ability to classify soil and its 

components 

1 History – formation and types of 

soil 1 T4 1-4 Chalk and Board 

2 composition - Index properties 1 T4 5-7 Chalk and Board 

3 Classification 1 T4 8,9 Chalk and Board 

4 phase relationship 1 T4 15-22 Chalk and Board 

5 Compaction– theory – laboratory 

and field technology 2 T4 26-34 Chalk and Board 

6

Field Compaction method -

Factors influencing 

compaction 

1 T4 36-44 Chalk and Board 

7 Problems 2 T4 45-58 Chalk and Board 

UNIT II EFFECTIVE STRESS AND PERMEABILITY 9

Objective: 

The objective of this unit is to help students to develop the ability to find the effective stress and 

permeability 

8 Soil - water – Static pressure in 

water 1 T4 75-80 Chalk and Board 

9 Effective stress concepts in soils 1 T4 81-86 Chalk and Board 

10 Capillary phenomena 1 T4 94-99 Chalk and Board 

11 Permeability – Darcy’s law 1 T4 102-110 Chalk and Board 

12 

Determination of Permeability – 

Laboratory Determination 

(Constant head and falling head 

methods) 

2 T4 111-125 Chalk and Board 

13 

Field measurement pumping out 

in unconfined and 

confined aquifer – Factors 

influencing permeability of soils 

1 T4 126-134 Chalk and Board 

14 Seepage - Two dimensional flow 

–Lap lace’s equation 1 T4 142-148 Chalk and Board 

15 

Introduction to flow nets – 

Simple problems Sheet pile and 

wier. 1 T4 158-163 Chalk and Board 3 of 4 

UNIT III STRESS DISTRIBUTION AND SETTLEMENT 9

Objective: 

The objective of this unit is to help students to develop the ability to analyse the various stress 

distribution 

16 

Stress distribution in 

homogeneous and isotropic 

medium 

1 T4 194-198 Chalk and Board 

17 Boussinesq theory 1 T4 200-204 Chalk and Board 

18 Use of Newmarks influence 

chart 1 T4 205-208 Chalk and Board 

19 Components of settlement 1 T4 208-210 Chalk and Board 

20 

Immediate and 

consolidation settlement – 

Factors influencing settlement 

1 T4 211-215 Chalk and Board 

21 Terzaghi’s one dimensional 

consolidation theory 2 T4 216-225 Chalk and Board 

22 

Computation of rate of 

settlement. – √t and log t 

methods. 

1 T4 225-227 Chalk and Board 

23 

e-log p relationship 

consolidation settlement- N-C 

clays – O.C clays – 

Computation. 

1 T4 228-231 Chalk and Board 

UNIT IV SHEAR STRENGTH 9

Objective: 

The objective of this unit is to help students to develop the ability to apply the concept of shear 

strength 

24 Shear strength of cohesive and 

cohesion less soils 1 T4 256-260 Chalk and Board 

25 Mohr-Coulomb failure theory 1 T4 261-264 Chalk and Board 

26 Shear strength - Direct shear, 1 T4 265-267 Chalk and Board 

27 Triaxial compression 2 T4 270-275 Chalk and Board 

28 UCC and Vane shear tests 2 T4 276-284 Chalk and Board 

29 Pore pressure parameters 1 T4 286-290 Chalk and Board 

30 Factors influences shear strength 

of soil. 1 T4 291-295 Chalk and Board 

UNIT V SLOPE STABILITY 9

Objective: 

The objective of this unit is to help students to develop the ability to identify various slope stabilities 

of soils. 

31 Infinite slopes and finite slopes 2 T4 300-312 Chalk and Board 4 of 4 

32 Friction circle method 2 T4 315-320 Chalk and Board 

33 Use of stability number 1 T4 321-323 Chalk and Board 

34 

Guidelines for 

location of critical slope surface 

in cohesive and c - soil 

2 T4 325-331 Chalk and Board 

35 Slope protection measures. 2 T4 332-341 Chalk and Board 

Assignment / Case Studies / Tutorials /Quiz / Mini Projects / Model Development / Task 

1. Problems on constant head and falling head method 

2. Problems on shear strength of soil 

TEXT BOOK 

 Murthy, V.N.S., “Text book of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering”, CBS Publishers 

Distribution Ltd., New Delhi. 2014 

 Arora, K.R., “Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering”, Standard Publishers and 

Distributors, New Delhi, 7th Edition, 2017(Reprint). 

 Gopal Ranjan, A S R Rao, “Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics” New Age International 

Publication, 3rd Edition, 2016. 

 Punmia, B.C., “Soil Mechanics and Foundations”, Laxmi Publications Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi,16th 

Edition, 2017. 

REFERENCES: 

 McCarthy, D.F., “Essentials of Soil Mechanics and Foundations: Basic Geotechnics”.Prentice-

Hall, 2006. 

 Coduto, D.P., “Geotechnical Engineering – Principles and Practices”, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. 

Ltd. New Delhi, 2010. 

 Braja M Das, “Principles of Geotechnical Engineering”, Cengage Learning India Private 

Limited, 8th Edition, 2014. 

 Palanikumar.M., “Soil Mechanics”, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd, Learning Private Limited 

Delhi, 2013. 

 Purushothama Raj. P., “Soil Mechanics and Foundations Engineering”,2nd Edition, Pearson 

Education, 2013. 

 Venkatramaiah.C., “Geotechnical Engineering”, New Age International Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 

PREPARED BY, APPROVED BY,

