# CE8491 QB

Title: Microsoft Word - CE8491-QB.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/QuestionBank/CE8491-QB.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 05 Dec 2022 16:01:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 

CE 8491 - SOIL MECHANICS 

Course Objectives 

The Student should be able 

S. No. Course Objective 

1

To impart knowledge to classify the soil based on index properties and to assess their engineering 

properties based on the classification. To familiarize the students about the fundamental concepts 

of compaction, flow through soil, stress transformation, stress distribution, consolidation and shear 

strength of soils. To impart knowledge of design of both finite and infinite slopes. 

Course Outcomes: 

On Completion of the course the students will be able to 

CO No. Course Outcome 

1 classify the soil and assess the engineering properties, based on index properties. 

2 Understand the stress concepts in soils 

3 Understand and identify the settlement in soils. 

4 Determine the shear strength of soil 

5 Analyze both finite and infinite slopes. 

BLOOMS TAXONOMY(BT Level) 

K1-Remembering , K2-Understanding, K3-Applying, K4-Analyzing, K5-Evaluating ,K6-Creating 

UNIT - 1 

Part B CO BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Alloted 

1. 

> Explain with a neat procedure for determining water content and
> specific gravity of a given soil in the laboratory by using a
> pycnometer

CO 1 KI 

> (AUC
> Nov/Dec
> 2012)

13 

2. 

The mass of wet soil when compacted in a mould was 

19.55kN. The water content of the soil was 16%. If the 

volume of the mould was 0.95m 3. Determine (i) dry unit 

weight, (ii) Void ratio, (iii) degree of saturation and (iv) 

percent air voids. Take G = 2.68. 

CO 1 K5 

> (AUC
> May/June
> 2012)

13 

3.          

> In a hydrometer analysis, the corrected hydrometer reading in a
> 1000 ml uniform soil suspension at the start of sedimentation
> was 28. After a lapse of 30 minutes, the corrected hydrometer
> reading was 12 and the corresponding effective depth 10.5cm.
> the specific gravity of the solids was 2.68. Assuming the

CO 1 K5 

> (AUC
> Apr/May
> 2012)

13 viscosity and unit weight of water at the temperature of the test 

as 0.001Ns/m2 and 9.81kN/m 3 respectively. Determine the 

weight of solids mixed in the suspension, the effective diameter 

corresponding to the 30 minutes reading and the percentage of 

particle finer than this size. 

4. 

A soil sample has a porosity of 40 percent. The specific gravity 

of solids is 2.70. Determine 

(i) Voids ratio 

(ii) Dry density and 

(iii) Unit weight if the soil is completely saturated. 

CO 1 K5 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2011) 13 

5. 

A laboratory compaction test on soil having specific gravity 

equal to 2.67 gave a maximum dry unit weight of 17.8kN/m3 

and a water content of 15%.Determine the degree of saturation, 

air content and percentage air voids at the maximum dry unit 

weight. What would be theoretical maximum dry unit weight 

corresponding to zero air voids at the optimum water content? 

CO 1 K1 

(AUC 

Nov/Dec 

2011) 13 

6. Explain Standard Proctor Compaction test with neat sketches. CO 1 K2 

(AUC 

Nov/Dec 

2010) 13 

7. Explain in detail the procedure for determination of grain size 

distribution of soil by sieve analysis. CO 1 K2 

(AUC 

Apr / May 

2009) 

13 

8. 

An earth embankment is compacted at a water content of 18% 

to a bulk density of 1.92g/cm3. If the specific gravity of the 

sand is 2.7, find the void ratio and degree of saturation of the 

compacted embankment. 

CO 1 K1 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2009) 

13 

UNIT-II 

Part B CO BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Alloted 

1. Explain the procedure for determination of permeability by 

constant head test in the laboratory. CO 2 K2 

(AUC 

Nov/Dec 

2012) 

13 

2. 

Determine the total, effective and pore pressure at a depth of 

20m below the bottom of a lake 6m deep. The bottom of lake 

consists of soft clay with a thickness of more than 20m. the 

average water content of the clay is 35% and specific gravity of 

the soil may be assumed to be 2.65. 

CO 2 K5 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2010) 

13 

3. 

In a constant head permeameter test, the following observations 

were taken. Distance between piezometer tappings = 15cm, 

difference of water levels in piezometers = 40cm, diameter of 

the test sample = 5cm, quantity of water collected = 500ml, 

duration of the test = 900sec. Determine the coefficient of 

permeability of the soil. If the dry mass of the15cm long sample 

is 486g and specific gravity of the solids is 2.65. Calculate 

seepage velocity of water during the test. 

CO 2 K5 

AUC 

May/June 

2012) 

13 4. Explain the falling head permeability test. CO 2 K2 

(AUC 

Apr / May 

2011) 

13 

5. What are the applications of flow net and explain briefly? CO 2 K1 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2011) 

13 

6. 

Determine the effective stress at 2m, 4m, 6m, 8m and 10m is a 

soil mass having γs =21 KN/m3. Water table is 2m below 

ground surface. Above water table there is capillary rise upto 

ground surface. Also draw total stress diagram up to 10m. 

CO 2 K5 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2011) 

13 

7. Explain in detail the laboratory determination of permeability 

using constant head method and falling head method. CO 2 K2 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2011) 

13 

8. 

The discharge of water collected from a constant head 

permeameter in a period of 15 minutes is 500 ml. the internal 

diameter of the permeameter is 5cm and the measured 

difference in head between two gauging points 15cm vertically 

apart is 40cm. Determine the coefficient of permeability. If the 

dry weight of the 15 cm long sample is 486 gm and the specific 

gravity of the solids is 2.65, calculate the seepage velocity. 

CO 2 K5 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2009) 13 

UNIT -III 

Part B CO BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Alloted 

1. 

A water tank is supported by a ring foundation having 

outer diameter of 10m and inner diameter of 7.5m. the ring 

foundation transmits uniform load intensity of 160 

kN/m2.Determine the vertical stress induced at depth of4 

m, below the centre of ring foundation, using (i) 

Boussinesque analysis and (ii)Westergaard’s analysis, 

taking μ= 0. 

CO 3 K5 

(AUC Apr 

/ May 

2010) 13 

2. Explain with a neat sketch the Terzhaghi’s one 

dimensional consolidation theory CO 3 K2 

(AUC 

Nov/Dec 

2012) 

13 

3. 

The load from a continuous footing of width 2m,which 

may be considered to be strip load of considerable length, 

is 200 kN/m2. Determine the maximum principal stress at 

1.5m depth below the footing, if the point lies (i)directly 

below the centre of the footing, (ii)directly below the edge 

of the footing and (iii)0.8m away from the edge of the 

footing. 

CO 3 K5 

(AUC 

May/June 

2012) 

13 

4. What are different components of settlement? Explain in 

detail. CO 3 K1 

(AUC 

May/June 

2012) 

13 5. Explain the Newmark’s influence chart in detail CO 3 K2 

> (AUC Apr
> / May
> 2011)

13 

6. a) Explain how will you determine pre-consolidation 

pressure? CO 3 K2 (AUC Apr 

> / May
> 2011)

6

b) Explain how will you determine coefficient of 

compression index (CC)from an oedomoter test ? CO 3 K2 7

7. 

Develop Boussinesque equations to find intensity of 

vertical pressure and tangential stress when a concentrated 

load is acting on the soil. 

CO 3 K6 

> (AUC
> Nov/Dec
> 2010)

13 

8. Explain in detail the laboratory determination of co-

efficient of consolidation. CO 3 K2 

> (AUC Apr
> / May
> 2009)

13 

UNIT-IV 

Part B CO BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Alloted 

1. 

Show the relationship between the principal stresses in 

triaxial compression test using Mohr-Coulomb failure 

theory. 

CO 4 K1  

> (AUC Apr
> / May
> 2010)

13 

2. 

Explain the step by step procedure for determination of 

cohesion of a given clayey soil by Conducting unconfined 

compression test. 

CO 4 K2  

> (AUC Apr
> / May
> 2012)

13 

3. 

Explain with neat sketches the procedure of conducting 

direct shear test. Give its advantages over other methods of 

finding shear strength of soil. 

CO 4 K2  

> (AUC
> May/June
> 2012)

13 

4. Explain in detail the unconfined compression test. CO 4 K2  

> (AUC
> May/June
> 2012)

13 

5. 

A vane, 10 cm long and 8cm in diameter, was pressed into 

soft clay at the bottom of a borehole. Torque was applied 

and gradually increasedto45 N-m when failure took place. 

Subsequently, the vane rotated rapidly so as to completely 

remould the soil. There moulded soil was sheared at a 

torque of 18N-m. Determine the cohesion of the clay in the 

natural and remoulded states and also the value of the 

sensitivity. 

CO 4 K5  

> (AUC
> Nov/Dec
> 2011)

13 

6. Explain the triaxial shear test. What are the advantages of 

triaxial shear test over the direct shear test? CO 4 K2  

> (AUC
> Nov/Dec
> 2011)

13 

7. Explain drained behavior of clay with reference to shear 

strength. CO 4 K2 (AUC Apr  

> / May

13 2011) 

8. 

A saturated specimen of cohesionless sand was tested in 

triaxial compression and the sample Failed at a deviator 

stress of 482kN/m2 when the cell pressure was 100kN/m2 

under the drained conditions. Find the effective angle of 

shearing resistance of sand. What would be the deviator 

stress and the major principal stress at failure for another 

identical specimen of sand, if it is tested under cell 

pressure of 200kN/m2. Use either Mohr’s circle method or 

analytical method. 

CO 4 K1  

> (AUC Apr
> / May
> 2012)

13 

UNIT - V 

Part B CO BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Alloted 

1. 

Explain the procedure to calculate the factor of safety of a 

finite slope possessing both cohesion and friction(c - Φ) by 

method of slices 

CO 5 K2 

> (AUC Apr
> / May
> 2010)

13 

2. Explain the procedure for determining the factor of safety 

of a given slope by friction circle method. 

CO 5 K2  

> (AUC Nov
> / Dec 2012)

13 

3. Explain with neat sketches the Bishop’s method of 

stability analysis 

CO 5 K2 

> (AUC
> May/June
> 2012)

13 

4. 

A canal is to be excavated to a depth of 6m below ground 

level through a soil having the following characteristics 

c=15kN/m2,Φ=20°,e=0.9andG=2.67.The slope of the 

banks is 1in1. Determine the factor of safety with respect 

to cohesion when the canal runs full. What will be the 

factor of safety if the canal is rapidly emptied completely? 

CO 5 K5 

> (AUC
> May/June
> 2012)

13 

5. What are different types of slope failures? Discuss the 

various methods for improving the stability of slopes. 

CO 5 K1  

> (AUC Nov
> / Dec 2011)

13 

6. Explain the Swedish slip circle method in detail CO 5 K2 

> (AUC
> April/May
> 2011)

13 

7. Explain Taylor’s stability number and its applicability. CO 5 K2 

> (AUC
> April/May
> 2011)

13 

8. Explain any four methods of slope protection CO 5 K2 

> (AUC
> April/May
> 2011)

13 PREPARED BY, APPROVED BY, 

Mrs.V.JANAKI DR.SOMESWARAN 

(AP/CIVIL) (HOD/CIVIL)

