# CE8591 LN

Title: CE8591-LN.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LectureNote/CE8591-LN.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 05 Dec 2022 15:48:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 151

Markdown Content:
> CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING
> Mr. Rakhesh R.

UNIT 1 

SITE INVESTIGATION AND SOIL EXPLORATION 

Site investigations and sub-surface explorations are done to obtain the information about 

subsurface conditions at the site of proposed construction. Information about the surface 

and subsurface feature is essential for the design of structures and for planning construction 

techniques. Site investigations consist of determining the profile of the natural soil deposits 

at the site, taking the soil samples and determining the engineering properties of the soil. It 

also includes in-situ testing of the soils. 

OBJECTIVES OF SITE INVESTIGATIONS 

1. To select the type and depth of foundation for a given structure. 

2. To determine the bearing capacity of the soil. 

3. To determine the probable maximum and differential settlements. 

4. To establish the ground water table and to determine the properties of water. 

5. To predict the lateral earth pressure against the retaining walls and abutments. 

6. To select suitable construction techniques. 

7. To predict and to solve potential foundation problems. 

8. To ascertain the suitability of the soil as construction material. 

9. To investigate the safety of the existing structures and to suggest the remedial 

measures. 

PLANNING A SUBSURFACE EXPLORATION PROGRAMME 

A subsurface exploration programme depends upon the type of the structure to be 

built and upon the variability of the strata at the proposed site. The extent of sub surface 

exploration is closely related to the relative cost of the investigation and that of the entire 

project for which is undertaken. 

In general, the more detailed investigations are done, the more is known about the 

subsurface conditions. As a result, a greater economy can be achieved in the construction 

of the project because the element of uncertainty is considerably reduced. 

The extent of investigation would also depend upon the location of the project. A 

small house in an already built-up area would not require much exploration on the other 

hand if the house is to be built in a newly developed area, detailed investigation is 

necessary. If a multi-storied building is to be constructed, extensive sub surface exploration 

is necessary. These buildings impose very heavy loads and the zone of influence is also CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

very deep. It would be therefore more desirable to invest some amount on sub surface 

exploration than to overdesign the buildings and make it costlier. 

STAGES IN SUB SURFACE EXPLORATION 

1) Reconnaissance 

Site reconnaissance is the first step in an investigation process. It includes a visit to 

the site and to study the maps and other relevant records. It helps in deciding future 

programme of site investigations, scope of work, methods of exploration to be 

adapted, types of samples to be taken and the laboratory testing and in-situ testing. 

The information about following features is obtained in reconnaissance: -

 The general topography of the site, the existence of drainage ditches and 

dumps of debris and sanitary fills. 

 Existence of settlement cracks in the structure already built near the site. 

 The evidence of landslides, creep of slopes and the shrinkage cracks. 

 The stratification of soils as observed from deep cuts near the site. 

 The location of high food marks on the nearby building and bridges. 

 The depth of ground water table as observed in the wells. 

 Existence of springs, swamps etc. at the site. 

 The drainage pattern existing at the site. 

 Type of vegetation existing at the site. 

 Existence of underground water mains, power conduits etc. at the site. 

The information obtained during reconnaissance is helpful in evolving a suitable 

sub surface investigation programme. In addition to making site visits, the 

geotechnical engineer should study geological maps, aerial photographs, toposheet, 

and soil maps, blue prints of the existing buildings. 

Study of maps: 

 Topographical maps called toposheets – survey of India and geological 

survey of India. 

 Soil conservation maps may also be available. 

 Faults, folds, cracks, fissures, dikes, skills and caves and such other defects 

in rock and soil strata may be indicated. 

 Maps showing the earthquake zones of different zones of different degree of 

vulnerability is available. 

 Seismic potential is a major factor in structural design especially in the 

construction of major structures such as dams and nuclear power plants. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

2) Preliminary exploration 

 The aim of a preliminary exploration is to determine the depth, thickness, 

extent and composition of each soil stratum at the site. 

 The depth of bed rock and ground water table is also determined. 

 The preliminary explorations are generally in the form of a few boring or test 

pits. Tests are conducted with cone penetrometers and sounding rods to 

obtain information about the strength and compressibility of soils. 

 Geophysical methods are also used in preliminary explorations for locating 

the boundaries of different strata. 

3) Detailed exploration 

 The purpose of the detailed explorations is to determine the engineering 

properties of the soils in different strata. It includes an extensive boring 

programme, sampling and testing of the samples in the laboratory. 

 Field tests such as vane shear tests, plate load tests, permeability tests are 

conducted to determine the properties of the soils in the natural of state. The 

tests for the determination of dynamic properties are also carried out, if 

required. 

 For complex projects involving heavy structures such as bridges, dams, 

multi-storey buildings it is essential to have detailed explorations. However, 

for smaller projects, especially at sites where the strata are uniform, detailed 

investigation may not be required. The design of such projects is generally 

based on the data collected during reconnaissance and preliminary 

explorations. 

DEPTH OF EXPLORATION 

Depth of exploration required, depends on the type of the proposed structure, its total 

weight, the size, shape and disposition of the loaded area, the physical properties of the 

soil that constitute the different strata e site. Exploration, in general, should be carried 

out to a depth up to which the increase in pressure due to structural loading is likely to 

cause foundation failure. Such a minimum depth is known as critical depth or 

significant depth. The net loading intensity at any level below the foundation is obtained 

by approximately assuming a spread of load of, two vertical to one horizontal, from all 

sides of the foundation. Due allowance should be made for the overlapping effects of 

the load from closely spaced footings. It is rally safe to assume the significant depth up 

to a level at which the net increase in vertical pressure becomes less than10% of the 

initial overburden pressure. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

The following guide rules may also be followed to decide the depth of exploration: -

Type of foundation Depth of exploration 

Isolated spread footing or raft 1.5 times the width 

Adjacent footings with clear spacing less 

than twice the width 

1.5 times the length 

pile foundations 10 to 30 m and more or at least 1.5 times 

the width of the structure 

Base of retaining walls One and a half times the base width or the 

exposed height, whichever is greater 

For black cotton areas, from the consideration of weathering. The exploration 

should be carried to a minimum depth of 4 m. 

METHODS OF SOIL EXPLORATION 

Mainly there are three methods. They are 

1. Direct methods 

2. Semi-direct methods 

3. Indirect methods 

1) Direct methods 

It includes open excavation methods of exploration. They are-

(a) Pits and Trenches 

Pits and trenches are excavated at the site to inspect the strata. The size of the pits should 

be sufficient to provide necessary working space.IS:4453-1967 recommends a clear 

working space of 1.2m x 102m at the bottom of the pit. The depth of the pit depends 

upon the requirement of the investigation. Shallow pits up to a depth 3m can be made 

without providing any lateral support. For deeper pits, especially below water table, the 

lateral support should be provided in the form of sheeting and bracing system. For 

depths greater than 6m, bore holes are economical than pits. Deep pits should be 

properly ventilated to prevent accumulation of dead air. If water is encountered in the 

pit, it should be properly dewatered. Trenches are long shallow pits. A trench is 

continuous over a considerable length; it provides exposure along a line. The trenches 

are more suitable than pits for exploration on slopes. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

(b) Drifts and Shafts 

Drifts are horizontal tunnels made in the hill side to determine the nature and structure 

of geological formation. A drift should have minimum clear dimensions of 1.5m width 

and 2m height in hard rock. Shafts are large size vertical holes made in the geological 

formation. These may be rectangular or circular in section. The minimum width of 

rectangular shaft is 204m and for circular, the minimum diameter is 204m. 

2) Semi-direct methods 

When the depth of exploration is large, borings are used for the explorations. A vertical 

hole is drilled in the ground to get the information about the sub soil strata. Samples are 

taken from the bore hole and tested in the laboratory. 

BORING METHODS 

Depending upon the type of soil and the purpose of boring, the following methods are 

used for drilling the holes: -

1) Auger Boring 

Augers are used in cohesive and other soft soils above water table. Hands augers are 

used for depth up to 6m. Mechanically operated augers are used for greater depths and 

they can also be used in gravelly soils. Samples recovered from the soil brought up by 

augers are badly disturbed nature of soil sample; it becomes difficult to locate the exact 

changes in the soil strata. Augers consist of a shank with a cross-wise handle for turning 

and having central tapered feed screw. It can be operated manually or mechanically. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

Mechanical augers are driven by power. These are used for making holes in hard strata 

to a great depth. Even mechanical augers become inconvenient for depth greater than 

12m and other methods of boring are used. The hand augers used in boring are about 

15to 20cm in diameter. It is attached to the lower end of the pipe of about 18mm 

diameter. The pipe is provided with cross arm at top. The hole is advanced by turning 

the cross arm manually and at the same time applying thrust in the downward direction. 

When the auger is filled with soil, it is taken out. If the hole is already driven, another 

type of auger known as post hole auger is used for taking soil samples. 

Disadvantages : -

 Sandy soil below water table, a casing is normally required. For such soils, the 

method of auger boring becomes slow and expensive. 

 It cannot be used when there are large cobbles, boulders or other obstructions 

which prevent drilling of the hole. 

 Auger boring is fairly satisfactory for highways, railways, airfield exploration at 

shallow depth. The sub- surface explorations are done quite rapidly and 

economically by auger boring. 

2) Auger and Shell boring 

Cylindrical augers and shell with cutting edge on teeth at the lower end can be used for 

making deep borings. Hand operated rings are used for depth up to 2.m and the 

mechanical ring up to 50m. Augers are suitable for soft to stiff clays, shells for very 

stiff and hard clays and shells or sand pumps for sandy soils. Small boulders, thin soft 

strata or rock or cemented gravel can be broken by chisel bits attached to drill rods. The 

hole usually requires a casing. 

3) Wash boring 

In wash boring, the hole is drilled by first driving a casing about 2 to 3m long and then 

inserted into a hollow drill rod with a chisel shaped chopping bit at its lower end. Water 

is pumped down the hollow drill rod, which is known as wash pipe. Water emerges as 

a strong jet through a small opening of the chopping bit. The hole is advanced by a 

combination of chopping action and the jetting action as the drilling bit and the 

accompanying water jet disintegrates the soil. The water and chopped soil particles rise 

upward through the annular space between the drill rod and the casing. The return water 

also known as wash water which is collected in a tub through a T-shaped pipe fixed at 

the top of the casing. The hole is further advanced by alternately raising and dropping 

the chopping by a winch. The swivel joint provided at the top of the drill rod facilitates 

the turning and twisting of the rod. The process is continued even below the costing till CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

the hole begins to cave in. At that stage the bottom of the casing can be extended by 

providing additional pieces at the top. However, in stable, cohesive soils the casing is 

required only in the top portion. Sometimes instead of casing, special drilling fluids 

made of suspension or emulsion of fat clays or bentonite combined with some special 

additives are used for supporting walls of the hole. The change in strata is provided by 

the reaction of the chopping bit as the hole is advanced. It is also indicated by a change 

in color of the wash water. The wash boring is mainly used for advancing a hole in the 

ground. Once the hole has been drilled, a sampler is inserted to obtain soil samples for 

testing in the laboratory. 

Disadvantages : -

 The equipment used in wash boring is relatively light and inexpensive. The main 

disadvantage of the method is that it is slow in stiff soils and coarse-grained soils. 

It cannot be used efficiently in hard soils, rocks and the soil containing boulders. 

 The method is not suitable for taking good quality undisturbed samples above 

ground water table, as the wash water enters the strata below the bottom of the hole 

and causes an increase in its water content. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

4) Percussion Drilling 

The percussion drilling method is used for making holes in rocks, boulders and other 

hard strata. In this method a heavy chisel is alternately lifted and dropped in a vertical 

hole. The material gets pulverized. If the point where chisel strikes is above the water 

table, water is added to the hole. The water forms slurry with the pulverized material 

which is removed by a sand pipe. Percussion drilling may require a casing. It is also 

used for drilling tube wells. The main advantage of the percussion drilling method is 

that it can be used for all types of materials. It is particularly useful for drilling holes in 

is glacial tills containing boulders. 

Disadvantages : -

 One of the major disadvantages is that the material at the bottom of the hole is 

disturbed by heavy blows of the chisel. 

 It is not possible to get good quality undisturbed samples. This method is generally 

more expensive. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

5) Rotary drilling 

Rotary boring or drilling is a very fast method of advancing hole in the both rocks and 

soils. A drill bit, fixed to the lower end of the drill rods, is rotated by a suitable chunk 

and is always kept in firm contact with the bottom of the hole. A drilling mud, usually 

a water solution of bentonite with or without other admixtures is continuously forced 

down the hollow drill rods. The mud entering upwards brings the cuttings to the surface. 

This method is also known as Mud Rotary Drilling and the hole usually requires no 

casing. When the soil sample is required to be taken the drilling rod is raised and the 

drilling bit is replaced by the samples. Rotary drilling can be used in clay, sand and 

rocks. Bore holes of diameter 50mm to 200mm can be easily made by this method. 

6) Core drilling 

The core drilling method is used for drilling holes and for obtaining rock cores. In this 

method a core barrel fitted with a drilling bit is fixed to a hollow drilling rod. As the 

drilling rod is rotated, the bit advances and cuts an annular hole an intact hole. The core 

is then removed from its bottom and is retained by a core –lifter and brought to the 

ground surface. The core drilling may be done using either a diamond studded bit or 

cutting edge consists of chilled shot. The diamond driller is superior to the other type 

of drilling, but it is costlier Water is pumped continuously into the drilling rod to keep 

the drilling bit cool and to carry the disintegrated materials to the ground surface. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

TYPES OF SOIL SAMPLES 

Two types of soil samples can be obtained during sampling disturbed and undisturbed. 

1) Disturbed sample 

In disturbed sampling, the natural structures of soils get partly or fully modified or 

destroyed, although with suitable precaution the natural water content may be 

preserved. Disturbed sample can be obtained by direct excavations by auger and thick 

wall samplers. The disturbances can be classified in following basic types: 

 Change in the stress condition. 

 Change in the water content and the void ratio. 

 Disturbance of the soil structure, Chemical changes. 

 Mixing and segregation of soil constituents. 

If all the constituents are present in the sample which represents the same soil type from 

any place, then it is called a representative sample . In the remolded sample , the 

engineering properties get changed due to remolding. 

2) Undisturbed sample 

In undisturbed sample, the natural structure and properties remain preserved. These 

samples are used to tests for shear, consolidation and permeability. For undisturbed 

sample the stress changes cannot be avoided. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

The following requirements are looked for: 

 No change due to disturbance of the soil structure. 

 No change in void ratio and water content. 

 No change in constituents and chemical properties. 

Sample Disturbances 

This depends on the design of samplers and methods of samplings. 

Design factors governing the degree of disturbances 

Cutting edge 

A typical cutting edge of a sampler is shown in the figure. 

The important design features of the cutting edge are 

a) Area ratio 

𝐴ₜ = ୈ₂² ି ୈ ₁²  

> ୈ₁²

x 100 

Where, 

D1 - internal diameter of the cutting edge 

D2 - external diameter of the cutting edge 

The area ratio should not exceed 25%. For good quality undisturbed samples, it should 

not exceed 10%. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

b) Inside clearance 

It allows elastic expansion of sample when it enters the tube. 

Inside Clearance = ୈ₃ି ୈ ₁ 

> ୈ₁

x 100 

Where, 

D3 - inside diameter of the sample tube 

The inside clearance must lie between I to 10%, for undisturbed sample it should be 

between 0.5 and 3%. 

c) Outside clearance 

Outside Clearance = ୈ₂ି ୈ ₄ 

> ୈ₄

x 100 

Where, 

D4 - the external diameter of the sample tube 

It should not be much greater than the inside clearance. Normally it lies between 0 and 

2 percent. It helps in reducing the force required to withdraw the tube. 

d) Inside wall friction 

The walls of the sampler should be smooth and kept properly oiled. 

e) Non-return valve 

The non-return valve should permit easy and quick escape of water and air when the 

sample is driven. 

f) Recovery ratio 

R = ୐ 

> ு

x 100 

Where, 

L - length of the sample within the tube 

H - depth of penetration of the sampling tube 

It represents the disturbance of the soil sample. For good sampling the recovery ratio 

should be 96 to 98 %. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

SOIL SAMPLES AND SAMPLERS 

DIFFERENT TYPES OF SAMPLERS 

1. Open Driver Sampler 

Open driver sampler can be of the thick wall type as well as of the thin wall type. The 

head of the sampler is provided with values to permit water and air to escape during 

driving. The check valve helps to retain the sample when the sampler is lifted. The tube 

may be seamless. If the tube splits in two parts which is called as split tube or split 

spoon sampler. 

2. Split Spoon Sampler 

It consists of tool-steel driving shoe at the bottom, a steel tube (that is split 

longitudinally in to halves) in the middle, and a coupling at the top. The steel tube in CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

the middle has inside and outside diameters of34.9mm and 50.8mm, respectively. When 

the bore hole is advanced to a desired depth, the drilling tools are removed. The split 

spoon sampler is attached to the drilling rod and then lowered to the bottom of the bore 

hole. The sampler is driven in to the soil at the bottom of the bore hole by means of 

hammer blows. The hammer blows occur at the top of the drilling rod. The hammer 

weights 623N. For each blow, the hammer drops a distance of O.762m. The number of 

blows required for driving the sampler through three 152.4mm interval is recorded. The 

sum of the number of blows required for driving the last two 152.4mm intervals is 

referred to as the standard penetration number; N. it is also commonly called the blow 

count. After driving is completed, the sampler is withdrawn and the shoe and coupling 

are removed. The soil sample collected inside the split tube is then removed and 

transferred to the laboratory in small glass jars. Determination of the standard 

penetration number and collection of split-spoon samples are usually done at 1.5m. 

3. Stationary Piston Sampler 

Stationary piston sampler consists of a sampler with a piston attached to a long piston 

rod extending up to the ground surface through the drill rods. The lower end of the 

sampler is kept closed with piston while the sampler is lowered through the bore hole. 

When the desired elevation reached, the piston rod is clamped; thereby keeping the 

piston stationary and the sampler tube is advanced further into the soil. The sampler is 

then lifted and the piston rod clamped in position. The piston prevents the entry of water 

and soil into the tube, when it is being lowered and also helps to retain the sample during 

the process of lifting the tube. The sampler is therefore very much being suited for 

sampling in soft soils and saturated sands. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

4. Rotary Sampler 

Rotary samplers are core barrel type with an outer tube provided with cutting teeth and 

a removable thin liner inside. It is used for sampling in stiff cohesive soils. 

5. Scraper Bucket Sampler 

If a sandy deposit contains pebbles, it is not possible to obtain samples by standard split 

spoon sampler by standard split spoon sampler or split spoon fitted with a spring core 

catcher. The pebbles come in between the springs and prevent their closure. For such 

deposits, a scraper bucket sampler can be used. A scraper bucket sampler can also be 

used for obtaining the samples of cohesion less soils below the water table. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

6. Shelby Tubes and Thin-Walled Sampler 

Shelby tubes are thin wall tube samplers made of seamless steel. The outside diameter 

of the tube may be between 40 to 125mm. The area ratio is less than 15% and the inside 

clearance is between 0.5 to 3%. The length of the tube is 5 to 10 times the diameter for 

sandy soils and 10 to 15 times the diameter for clayey soils. The diameter generally 

varies between 40 and 125mm and thickness varies from 1.25 to 3.15mm. The sampler 

tube is attached to the drilling rod and lowered to the bottom of the bore hole. It is then 

pushed into the soil. Care should be taken to push the tube into the soil by a continuous 

rapid motion without impact or twisting. The tube should be pushed to the length 

provided for the sample. At least 5 minutes after pushing the tube into its final position, 

the tube is turned revolutions to shear the sample off at the bottom before it is 

withdrawn. The tube is taken out and its ends are sealed before transportation. Shelby 

tubes are used for obtaining undisturbed samples of clay. 

7. Denison Sampler 

The Denison sampler is a double walled sampler. The outer barrel rotates and cuts into 

the soil. The sample is obtained in the inner barrel. The inner barrel is provided with a 

liner. It may also be provided with a basket type core retainer. The Denison sampler is 

mainly used for obtaining samples of stiff to hard cohesive soils and slightly cohesive 

sands. However, it cannot be used for gravelly soils, loose cohesion less sands and silts 

below ground water table and very soft cohesive soils. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

Hand-Curved Samples 

Hand curved samples can be obtained if the soil is exposed, as in a test pit, shaft or 

tunnel. Hand curved samples are also known as chunk samples. The soil should have at 

least a trace of cohesion so that it can stand unsupported for sometimes. To obtain a 

sample, a column of soil is isolated in the pit. The soil is carefully removed from around 

the soil column and it is properly trimmed. An open-ended box is then placed over the 

soil column. The space between the box and the soil column is fitted with paraffin. A 

spade or a plate with sharp edges is inserted below the box and the sample is cut at its 

base. The box filled with the soil sample is removed. It is turned over and the soil 

surface in the box is trimmed and any depression is filled with paraffin. A chunk sample 

may be obtained without using the box if the soil is cohesive. A column of soil is 

isolated. The block of soil is carefully removed from the soil column with sharp knife. 

The chunk sample is then coated with paraffin wax to prevent loss of moisture. Samples 

from open pits can also be obtained by pressing a sampling tube provided with a cutting 

edge. The soil surrounding the outside of the tube is carefully removed while the tube 

is being pushed into the soil. Hand – curved samples are undisturbed. 

Preservation of samples 

Undisturbed samples which are to be tested after some time should be maintained in 

such a way that the natural water content is retained and no evaporation are allowed. 

Usually, two coats of 12mm thick paraffin wax and petroleum jelly are applied in 

molten state on either end, of the sample is preserved in a humidity-controlled room. In 

the absence of such facilities, the sampling tubes should be covered by Hessian bags 

and sprinkled with water from time to time. Block samples may be coated with 6mm 

thick paraffin wax and kept in air-tight box with saw dust filling the annular space 

between the box and the sample. 

FIELD TESTS 

The in-situ tests in the field have the advantage of testing the soils in their natural, 

undisturbed condition. Laboratory tests, on the other hand, make use of small size 

samples obtained from boreholes through samplers and therefore the reliability of these 

depends on the quality of the so called 'undisturbed' samples. Further, obtaining 

undisturbed samples from non-cohesive, granular soils is not easy, if not impossible. 

Therefore, it is common practice to rely more on laboratory tests where cohesive soils 

are concerned. Further, in such soils, the field tests being short duration tests, fail to 

yield meaningful consolidation settlement data in any case. Where the subsoil strata are 

essentially non-cohesive in character, the bias is most definitely towards field tests. The 

data from field tests is used in empirical, but time-tested correlations to predict CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

settlement of foundations. The field tests commonly used in subsurface investigation 

are: 

 Penetration Test 

 Standard cone Penetration test 

 Plate load test 

STANDARD PENETRATION TEST 

The standard penetration test is carried out in a borehole, while the DCPT and SCPT 

are carried out without a borehole. All the three tests measure the resistance of the 

soil strata to penetration by a penetrometer. Useful empirical correlations between 

penetration resistance and soil properties are available for use in foundation design. 

This is the most extensively used penetrometer test and employs a split-spoon 

sampler, which consists of a driving shoe, a split-barrel of circular cross-section 

which is longitudinally split into two parts and a coupling. IS: 2131-1981 gives the 

standard for carrying out the test. 

Procedure: 

 The borehole is advanced to the required depth and the bottom cleaned. 

 The split-spoon sampler, attached to standard drill rods of required length is 

lowered into the borehole and rested at the bottom. 

 The split-spoon sampler is driven into the soil for a distance of 450mm by blows 

of a drop hammer (monkey) of 65 kg falling vertically and freely from a height 

of 750 mm. The number of blows required to penetrate every 150 mm is recorded 

while driving the sampler. The number of blows required for the last 300 mm of 

penetration is added together and recorded as the N value at that particular depth 

of the borehole. The number of blows required to effect the first 150mm of 

penetration, called the seating drive, is disregarded. 

 The split-spoon sampler is then withdrawn and is detached from the drill rods. 

The split-barrel is disconnected from the cutting shoe and the coupling. The soil CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

sample collected inside the split barrel is carefully collected so as to preserve the 

natural moisture content and transported to the laboratory for tests. Sometimes, a 

thin liner is inserted within the split-barrel so that at the end of the SPT, the liner 

containing the soil sample is sealed with molten wax at both its ends before it is 

taken away to the laboratory. 

The SPT is carried out at every 0.75 m vertical intervals in a borehole. This can be 

increased to 1.50 m if the depth of borehole is large. Due to the presence of boulders 

or rocks, it may not be possible to drive the sampler to a distance of 450 mm. In 

such a case, the N value can be recorded for the first 300 mm penetration. The boring 

log shows refusal and the test is halted if-

 50 blows are required for any 150mm penetration 

 100 blows are required for 300m penetration. 

 10 successive blows produce no advance. 

Precautions: 

 The drill rods should be of standard specification and should not be in bent 

condition. 

 The split spoon sampler must be in good condition and the cutting shoe must be 

free from wear and tear. 

 The drop hammer must be of the right weight and the fall should be free, 

frictionless and vertical. 

 The height of fall must be exactly 750 mm. Any change from this will seriously 

affect the N value. 

 The bottom of the borehole must be properly cleaned before the test is carried 

out. If this is not done, the test gets carried out in the loose, disturbed soil and 

not in the undisturbed soil. When a casing is used in borehole, it should be 

ensured that the casing is driven just short of the level at which the SPT is to be 

carried out. Otherwise, the test gets carried out in a soil plug enclosed at the 

bottom of the casing. 

 When the test is carried out in a sandy soil below the water table, it must be 

ensured that the water level in the borehole is always maintained slightly above the 

ground water level. If the water level in the borehole is lower than the ground 

water level, 'quick' condition may develop in the soil and very low N values may 

be recorded. 

In spite of all these imperfections, SPT is still extensively used because-

 The test is simple and relatively economical. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

 It is the only test that provides representative soil samples both for visual 

inspection in the field and for natural moisture content and classification 

tests in the laboratory. 

SPT values obtained in the field for sand have to be corrected before they are used 

in empirical correlations and design charts. IS: 2131-1981 recommends that the 

field value of N be corrected for two effects, namely 

(a) effect of overburden pressure 

(b) effect of dilatancy. 

(a) Correction for overburden pressure 

Several investigators have found that the penetration resistance or the N value in a 

granular soil is influenced by the overburden pressure. Of two granular soils 

possessing the same relative density but having different confining pressures, the 

one with a higher confining pressure gives a higher N value. Since the confining 

pressure (which is directly proportional to the overburden pressure) increases with 

depth, the N values at shallow depths are underestimated and the N values at larger 

depths are overestimated. To allow for this, N values recorded from field tests at 

different effective overburden pressures are corrected to a standard effective 

overburden pressure. 

The corrected N values given by-

N' = C N N

Where, 

N' – Corrected value of observed N 

CN – Correction factor for overburden pressure 

b) Correction for dilatancy 

Dilatancy correction is to be applied when N' obtained after overburden correction, 

exceeds 15 in saturated fine sands and silts. IS: 2131-1981 incorporates the Terzaghi 

and Peck recommended dilatancy correction (when N'> 15) using the equation 

N" = 15 + 0.5 (N'-15) 

Where, 

N" - final corrected value to be used in design charts 

If N' < 5.15, N = N' CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

N' > 15 is an indication of a dense sand. In such a soil, the fast rate of application of 

shear through the blows of a drop hammer, is likely to induce negative pore water 

pressure in a saturated fine sand under undrained condition of loading. 

Consequently, a transient increase in shear resistance will occur, leading to a SPT 

value higher than the actual one. 

CONE PENETRATION TEST 

The cone test was developed by the Dutch government, soil mechanics laboratory 

at Defit and is therefore also known as Dutch cone test. The test is conducted either 

by the Static method or by dynamic method. 

Static Cone Penetration Test 

The Dutch cone has an apex angle of 60 and an overall diagram of 35.7mm giving 

an overall diagram of 35.7mm giving an end area of 10cm 2. For obtaining the cone 

resistance, the cone is pushed downward at a steady rate of 10mm/sec through a 

depth of 35mm each time. The cone is pushed by applying thrust and not by driving. 

After the cone resistance has been determined the cone is withdrawn. The sleeve is 

pushed onto the cone both are driven together into the soil and the combined 

resistance is also determined. The resistance of the sleeve alone is obtained by 

subtracting the cone resistance from the combined resistance. A modification of the 

Dutch cone penetrometers is the refined Dutch cone. It has got a friction sleeve of 

limited length above the cone point. It is used for obtaining the point resistance of 

the cone and the frictional resistance of the soil above cone point. 

For effective use of the cone penetration test, some reliable calibration is required. 

This consists of comparing the results with that Dutch cone obtained from 

conventional tests conducted on undisturbed sample in a laboratory. It is also 

convenient to compare the cone test results with SPT results, are related to the SPT CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

number N, indirect correlations are obtained between the cone tests and the 

engineering properties of the soil. 

The following relation holds approximately good between the point resistance of 

the cone (9c) and the standard penetration Number (N) 

i) Gravels 9c = 800N to 1000N 

ii) Sands 9c = 500N to 600N 

iii) Silly sands 9c = 300N to 400N 

iv) Sills & clayey 9c = 200N where 9c is in KN/m 2 silts 

Dynamic Cone Penetration Test 

The test is conducted by driving the cone by blows of a hammer. The number of 

blows for driving the cone through a specified distance is a measure of dynamic 

cone resistance. It is performed either by using a 50mm cone without bentonite 

slurry or by using a 65mm cone with bentonite slurry (IS 4968 – part I &II 1976) 

The driving energy is given by 65kg hammer falling through a height of 75cm. 

The number of blows required for 30cm of penetration is taken as the dynamic 

cone resistance (N cbr ). If the skin friction is to be eliminated, the test is conducted 

in a cased bore hole. When a 65mm cone with bentonite slurry is used, the set up 

should have arrangement for circulating slurry so that the friction on the driving 

rod is eliminated. The dynamic cone resistance (N cbr ) is correlated with the SPT 

number N. the following approximate relations may be used when a 50mm 

diameter cone is used. 

Ncbr Depth 

1.5N < 3m 

1.75N 3 – 6m 

2.0N > 6m 

The central building research Institute, Roorkee has developed the following 

correlation between the dynamic cone resistance (N cbr ) of SPT Number N. It is 

applicable for medium to fine sand. 

Ncbr Depth 

1.5N < 4m 

1.75N 4 – 9m 

2.0N > 9m CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

PLATE LOAD TEST 

The plate load test is a semi-direct method to measure the allowable pressure of soil 

to induce a given amount of settlement. Plates, round or square, varying in sizes, 

from 30 to 60 cm and thickness of about 2.5 cm are employed for the test. The load 

on the plate is applied by making use of a hydraulic jack. The reaction of the jack 

load is taken by a cross beam or a steel truss anchored suitably at both the ends. The 

settlement of the plate is measured by a set of three dial gauges of sensitivity 

0.02mm placed at 1200 apart. The dial gauges are fixed to independent supports 

which do not get disturbed during the test. Fig shows the arrangement for the plate 

load test. 

Procedure: 

 Excavate a pit of size not less than 5 times the size of the plate. The bottom of the 

pit coincides with level of the foundation. 

 If water table is above the level of foundation, pump out the water carefully and 

it should be kept just at the level of the foundation. 

 A suitable size of the plate is selected for the test. Normally a plate of size 30cm 

is used in sandy soil and bigger size in clay soils. The ground should be leveled 

and the plate is seated over the ground. 

 A seating load of about 70g/cm2 is first placed and released after sometime. A 

higher load is next placed on the plate and-settlements are recorded by means of 

the dial gauges. 

 Observations on every load increment shall be taken until the rate of settlement 

is less than 0.25mm per hour. Load increments shall be approximately one-fifth 

of the estimated safe bearing capacity of the soil. The average of the settlements 

recorded by 2 or 3 dial gauges taken as the settlements of the plate for each of the 

load increment. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

 The test should continue until a total settlement of 2.5cm or the settlement at 

which the soil fails, whichever is earlier, is obtained. After the load is increased, 

the elastic rebound of the soil should be recorded. 

Interpretation from test results: 

The allowable pressure of the prototype foundation for an assumed settlement may 

be found and by making use of the following equations as suggested by Terzaghi 

and Peck. 

For granular soils, 

Sf = S p [஻(௕ₚା଴ .ଷ)

> ௕ₚ( ஻ା଴ .ଷ)

# ]2

For clay soils, 

Sf = S p

> ஻
> ௕ₚ

Where, 

Sf = permissible settlement of the foundation in mm 

Sp = settlement of the plate in mm 

B = size of plate in m 

bp = size of plate in m 

The permissible settlement S f for a prototype foundation should be known. 

Normally a settlement of 2.5cm is recommended. In the equation the values of S f

and b p are known. The unknowns are S p and B. The value of S p for any assumed 

value of B may be found out from the equation. Using the plate load settlement 

curve, the value of the bearing pressure corresponding to the computed value of S p

is found out. This bearing pressure is the safe bearing pressure for a given 

permissible settlement S f. 

Limitations 

 Since a plate load test is of short duration, consolidation settlements cannot be 

predicted. The test gives the value of immediate settlements only. If the 

underlying soil is sandy in nature immediate settlement can be taken as total 

settlement. If the soil is of clayey type, the immediate settlement is only a part of 

the total settlement. Load tests, therefore do not have much significance in clayey 

soils to determine allowable pressure on the basis of settlement criterion. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

 Plate load test results should be used with caution and the present practice is not 

to rely too much on this test. If the soil is not homogenous to a great depth, plate 

load tests give very misleading results. 

 Plate load tests is not at all recommended in soils which are not homogenous at 

least to a depth equal to 1.5 to 2 times the width of the prototype foundation. 

 Plate load tests should not be relied on to determine the ultimate bearing capacity 

of sandy soils as the scale effects give misleading results. However, when the 

tests are carried on clay soils, the ultimate bearing capacity as determined by the 

test may be taken as equal to that of the foundation since the bearing capacity of 

clay is essentially independent of the footing size. The plate load test is possibly 

the only way of determining the allowable bearing pressures in gravelly soil 

deposits. For tests on such soil deposits the size of the plate should be bigger to 

eliminate the effect of grain size. 

GEOPHYSICAL METHODS OF SOIL EXPPLORATION 

SEISMIC REFRACTION METHOD 

This method is based on the fact that seismic waves have different velocities in 

different types of soils and besides the wave refract when they cross boundaries 

between different types of soils. In this method an artificial impulse is produced 

either by detonation of explosive or mechanical blow with a heavy hammer at 

ground surface or at the shadow depth within a hole. These shocks generate three 

types of waves: 

 Longitudinal or compressive wave or primary (p) wave 

 Transverse or shear waves or secondary (s) waves 

 Surface waves 

It is primarily the velocity of longitudinal or the compression waves which is 

utilized in this method. The equation on the p-waves (V c) and s-waves (V s) is given 

as 

Vc = √ ா(ଵି μ)  

> (ଵା μ)( ଵିଶ μ)ఘ

√ 𝐸 

2𝜌 (1 + μ) CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

Where, 

E is the dynamic modulus of the soil 

μ is the Poisson’s ratio 

ρ is density 

G is the dynamic shear modulus 

These waves are classified as direct, reflected and refracted waves. The direct waves 

travel in approximately straight line from the source of impulse. The reflected and 

refracted wave undergoes a change in direction when they encounter a boundary 

separating media of different seismic velocities. This method is more suited to the 

shallow explorations for civil engineering purpose. The time required for the 

impulse to travel from the shot point to various points on the ground surface is 

determined by means of geophones which transform the vibrations into electrical 

currents and transmit them to a recording unit or oscillograph, with a timing 

mechanism. 

Assumptions 

The various assumptions involved are 

 All the soil layers are horizontal 

 The layers are sufficiently thick to produce a response 

 Each layer is homogeneous and isotropic 

 Velocity should increase with depth following the Snell‟s law as given 

i1 is the angle of incidence 

i2 is the angle of refraction 

v1 and v 2 are velocity in two different mediums 

Procedure 

The detectors are generally placed at varying distance from the shot point but along 

the straight line. The arrival time of the first impulse at each geophone is utilized. If 

the successfully deeper strata transmit the waves with increasingly greater velocities 

the path travelled by the first impulse will be similar to those. Those recorded by the 

nearest recorders pass entirely through the overburden, whereas those first reaching 

the after detectors travel downward through the lower velocity material, horizontally 

within the higher velocity stratum and return to the surface. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

Advantages 

 Complete picture of stratification of layer up to 10 m depth. 

 Refraction observations generally employ fewer source and receiver location 

and thus relatively cheap to acquire. 

 Little processing is done on refraction observations with the exception of trace 

scaling or filtering to help in the process of picking the arrival times of the 

initial ground motion. 

 Because such a small portion of the recorded ground motion is used developing 

models and interpretations is no more difficult than our previous efforts with 

other geophysical surveys. 

 Provides seismic velocity information for estimating material properties. 

 Provides greater vertical resolution than electrical, magnetic or gravity methods. 

 Data acquisition requires very limited intrusive activity is non- destructive. 

Disadvantages 

 Blind zone effect: If v 2< v 1, then wave refracts more towards normal then the 

thickness of the strata is neglected. 

 Error also introduced due to some dissipation of the velocity as longer the path 

of travel, geophone receives the erroneous readings. 

 Error lies in all assumptions. 

Applications 

 Depth and characterization of the bed rock surfaces. 

 Buried channel location. CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

 Depth of the water table. 

 Depth and continuity of stratigraphy interfaces. 

 Mapping of faults and other structural features. 

ELECTRICAL RESISTIVITY METHOD 

Electrical resistivity method is based on the difference in the electrical conductivity 

or electrical resistivity of different soils. Resistivity is defined as the resistance in 

ohms between opposite phases of a unit cube of a material. 

# ρ = ோ஺ 

> ௅

where, 

ρ is resistivity in ohm-cm 

R is resistance in ohms 

A is the cross-sectional area (cm 2)

L is the length of the conduction (cm) 

Procedure 

In this method the electrodes and driven approximately 20cm in to the ground and 

a dc or a very low frequency ac current of known magnitude is passed between the 

outer electrodes thereby producing within the soil an electrical field and the 

boundary conditions. The electrical potential at point C is V c and at the point D is 

Vd which is measured by means of the inner electrodes respectively. 

VC = ூ஡  

> ଶగ

( ଵ 

> ௥₁

− ଵ

> ௥₂

)

VD = ூ஡  

> ଶగ

( ଵ 

> ௥₃

− ଵ

> ௥₄

)

Where, 

ρ is resistivity 

I is current 

r1, r 2, r 3 and r 4 are the distances between the various electrodes CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

Potential difference between C and D = V CD 

VC – V D = ூ஡ 

> ଶగ

# [ቀ ଵ 

> ௥భ

− ଵ

> ௥మ

ቁ − ( ଵ 

> ௥₃

− ଵ

> ௥₄

)]

Ρ = ଶగ୚େୈ  

> ூ

# [ ଵ     

> ቀభ
> ೝభିభ
> ೝమቁିቀభ
> ೝయିభ
> ೝరቁ

# ]

If r 1 = r 4 = (r 2/2) = (r 3/2) Then the resistivity is given as 

# ρ = ଶగோ௥ ₁

> ூ

Where, 

Resistances R= VCD/I 

Thus, the apparent resistivity of the soil to the depth approximately equal to the 

spacing r 1 of the electrode can be computed. The resistivity unit is often so designed 

that the apparent resistivity can be read directly on the potentiometer. In resistivity 

mapping or transverse profiling the electrodes are moved from place to place 

without changing their spacing and the apparent resistivity and any anomalies within 

a depth a depth equal to the spacing of the electrodes can thereby be determined for 

a number of points. In resistivity sounding or depth profiling the center point of the 

set-up is stationary whereas the spacing of the electrode is varied. A detailed 

evaluation of the results of the resistivity sounding is rather complicated, but 

preliminary indications of the subsurface conditions may be obtained by plotting the 

apparent resistivity as a function of electrode spacing. When the electrode spacing 

reaches a value equal to the depth to a deposit with a resistivity materially different 

from that of overlying strata, the resultant diagram will generally show a more or 

less pronounced break in the strata depth beyond A 2.CE8591 FOUNDATION ENGINEERING 

> Mr. Rakhesh R.

In practice many several different arrays are used. For simple sounding a Wenner 

array is used. Then the resistivity is given as 

ρ = ଶగோ 

> ூ

Where a is the spacing between the electrodes. The Schlumberger array is used for 

profiling and sounding. In sounding configuration, the current electrodes separated 

by AB are symmetric about the potential electrodes MN. The current electrodes are 

then expanded and the resistivity is given as 

ρ = గ(௦²ିೌ ²  

> ర)
> ௔

R

Resistivity profiling 

 Map faults. 

 Map lateral extent of conductive contaminant process. 

 Locate voids. 

 Map heavy metals soil contamination. 

 Delineate disposal areas. 

 Map paleochannels. 

 Explore for sand and gravels. 

 Map archaeological sites. 

Advantages 

 It is very rapid and economical method. 

 It is good up to 30 m depth. 

 The instrumentation of this method is very simple. 

 It is a non-destructive method. 

Disadvantages 

 It can only detect absolutely different strata like rock and water. 

 It provides no information about the sample. 

 Cultural problems cause interference. 

 Data acquisition can be slow compared to other geophysical methods, 

although that difference is disappearing with the very latest techniques. 1

UNIT – 3 

FOOTINGS AND RAFTS 

Types of isolated footing, combined footing, mat foundation – contact pressure and settlement distribution 

– proportioning of foundations for conventional rigid behavior – minimum thickness for rigid behavior – 

applications – compensated foundation – Codal provision 

SPREAD FOOTING 

• It is basically a pad used to spread out loads from walls or columns over a sufficiently large area 

of foundation soil. 

• These are constructed as close to the ground surface as possible. 

• This type of foundation is suitable for walls and masonry columns. 

• It is economical for a maximum depth of 3 m. 

• Then a plain concrete mix 1:4:8 is placed. Its thickness differs from 150 to 200 mm. 

• The stone-masonry footing is constructed over this bed. 

• It is constructed in courses and each course is projected 50 to 75 mm from the top course and the 

height of each course is 150 to 200 mm. 

• The projection of bed concrete from the lowest course of foundation masonry is usually 150 mm. 2

Advantages 

• It decreases cracking bring out by settlement. 

• It balances soil around the base of the structure. 

• Easy construction of basements. 

• It has continuous contact with the whole foundation which decreases the risk of foundation 

collapse. 

• Cost savings in construction, design, and quality control. 

Disadvantages 

• It is restricted to certain soil structures only and cannot be utilized for all forms of soil. 

• This type of foundation is regularly put through torsion, moment, and pullout. 

• Settlement is a huge problem in this type of foundation. 

STRAP FOOTING 3

• A strap footing comprises two or more footings connected by a beam called strap. 

• This is also called as cantilever footing or pump-handle foundation. 

• This may be required when the footing of an exterior column cannot extend into an adjoining 

private property. 

• The base regions of the footings are proportioned so the bearing pressing factors are uniform and 

equivalent under the two bases. 

Advantages 

• It helps distribute load uniformly and transfer moment to the adjacent footing. 

• It prevents the column from tilting. 

• The employment of a strap footing may be excusable where the gap between columns is long and 

a regular combined footing is impractical due to the required massive excavation. 

Disadvantages 

• Strap footing requires more concentration while it has been constructed because it has a difficult 

design. 

• It can become more time-consuming comparatively as the calculation of pressure bearing, pressure 

distribution, moment, forces, and shears can become complex. 

• It will demand expert workers for its construction. 

COMBINED FOOTING 

• If two or more columns are supported in a row and a common foundation is provided them then 

the footing is called combined footing. 

• If the individual footing has to accommodate two or in exceptional cases more than two columns 

are known as combined footing. 

• Usually, the combined footing is made also of reinforcement concrete. In the combined footing 

the footing assumes to rigid and resting on homogeneous soil. 

• When the load-bearing capacity of the soil is low and when under the individual footing required 

more area then combined footing is construed. 

• The combined footing should be rectangular combined footing, trapezoidal combined footing, 

strap combined footing, and raft combined footing. 

• In this combined footing the maximum bending moment takes as the design value for the 

reinforced concrete footing. 

• The development length check for the longitudinal steel. The longitudinal bars curtail the 

economy. To get uniform pressure distribution under the footing the combined footing is widely 

used. 4

Advantages 

• If there is requirement of two or more columns to be construed in a small area then we can use 

combined footing. 

• Where the load-bearing capacity of the soil is low, we construed combined footing. 

• Where the soil capacity of the Construction area is unequal to distribute the load evenly to the sub-

soil combined footing is constructed. 

• The combined footing can be used in the difficult construction sides. 

• when a column closes the property line and footing is not spread the front of the property line then, 

combined footing help to construct the column. 

• To get uniform pressure distribution under the footing the combined footing is widely used. 

• This type of combined footing is more profitable than another footing. 

• The combined footing is provided to equally distribute the load to the super-structure to the sub-

soil. 

CONTACT PRESSURE 

• Generally, loads from the structure are transferred to the soil through footing. 

• A reaction to this load, soil exerts an upward pressure on the bottom surface of the footing which 

is termed as contact pressure. 

• This upward pressure is assumed to be uniform in deriving different relationship for soil-structure 

interaction problem. 

• But actually, a footing is not flexible as well as contact pressure is not uniform, necessitating more 

investigation for actual pressure distribution. 5

Contact pressure distribution under flexible footing 

Cohesive soil 

• The settlement is maximum at center of footing and minimum at the edges which forms bowl like 

shape. 

• But the contact pressure is distributed uniformly along the settlement line or deflected line. 

Cohesionless soil 

 The settlement at center becomes minimum while at edges it is maximum which exact opposite 

case of the settlement of flexible footing over cohesive soil. 

 But in this case also contact pressure is uniform along the settlement line. 

Contact pressure distribution under rigid footing 

Cohesive soil 

• The settlement is uniform but contact pressure varies. 

• At edges, contact pressure is maximum and at center it is minimum which forms inverted bowl. 

• The values of stresses at edges becomes finite when plastic flow occurs in real soils. 6

Cohesionless soil 

• The contact pressure is maximum at center and gradually reduces to zero towards edges. 

• Settlement is uniform. 

• If the footing is embedded, then there may be some amount of contact pressure at the edges of 

rigid footing. 

Factors influencing contact pressure 

1. Elastic properties of footing. 

2. Elastic properties of soil. 

3. Thickness of footing. 

Consequences of assuming uniformity in pressure 

• For convenience, the contact pressure is assumed to be uniform for all types of footings and all 

types of soils if load is symmetric. 

• The above assumption of uniform pressure distribution will result in a slightly unsafe design for 

rigid footing on clays, as the maximum bending moment at center is underestimated. 

• It will give a conservative design for rigid footings on sandy (cohesionless) soils, as the maximum 

bending moment is overestimated. 

• However, at the ultimate stage just before failure, the soil behaves as an elasto-plastic material 

(and not an elastic material) and the contact pressure is uniform and the assumption is justified at 

the ultimate stage. 7

RAFT FOUNDATION 

• A raft or mat foundation is a combined footing which covers the entire area beneath of a 

structure and supports all the walls and columns. 

• This type of foundation is most appropriate and suitable when the allowable soil pressure is low, 

or the loading heavy and spread footings would cover more than half the plan areas. 

• Also, when the soil contains lenses of compressible strata which are likely to cause considerable 

differential settlement, a raft foundation is well-suited, since it would tend to bridge over the 

erratic spots, by virtue of its rigidity. 

Types of mat foundation 

1. Flat slab type 

• It represents a true raft which is flat concrete slab of uniform thickness throughout the entire 

area. 

• It is suitable for closely spaced columns carrying small loads. 

2. Flat slab thickened under columns 

• It represents a raft with a portion of the slab under the thickened column. 

• It provides sufficient strength for relatively large column loads. 8

3. Two-way beam and slab type 

• It represents raft with thickened bands provided along column lines in both directions. 

• This provides sufficient strength when column spacing is large and column load is unequal. 

4. Flat slab with pedestals 

• It represents a raft in which pedestals are provided under each column. 

• It provides sufficient strength for relatively large column loads. 

5. Cellular type 9

• It represents a two-way grid structure made of cellular construction and of intersecting structural 

steel construction. 

6. Basement walls as rigid frame 

 It represents wherein basement walls have been used as ribs or deep beams. 

Advantages of Raft Foundation 

• Raft foundations are constructed for shallow depths hence, it requires less excavation 

• Well suitable in soils of low bearing capacity. 

• Loads coming from superstructure are distributed over a larger area. 

• Differential settlement of soil can be reduced. 

Disadvantages of Raft Foundation 

• In some cases, large amount of reinforcement is required for raft foundation which increases the 

cost of project. 

• Special attention on raft foundations is required in case of concentrated loads. 

• If they are not treated properly, there is a chance of edge erosion. 

• Skilled workers are required to construct the raft foundations. 

SEISMIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR FOOTING DESIGN 

Foundations in seismic zones are subjected to additional forces due to seismic waves. If the structure is 

not able to withstand these forces, it may collapse leading to serious catastrophes. A foundation is the 

lowest part of a structure, which is normally below the ground level. Foundations are provided to transmit 

the load of the superstructure to the underlying soil. It is necessary that the subsoil can withstand these 

loads. For this, the superimposed load should be lower than the safe bearing capacity of the soil. In case 

of foundations in seismic zones, additional loads are created due to the seismic vibrations. The design 

should consider the additional forces. 10 

General requirements in the seismic design of foundations 

 Site investigations and determination of soil properties. 

 Details of geological and geotechnical environment. 

 Identification of loads - static and dynamic. 

 Type of foundation. 

 Safety verification as per building codes. 

Soil Investigations for Seismic Designs 

The important soil parameters to be analyzed are: 

 Particle size distribution 

 Relative density 

 Shear modulus 

 Damping factors 

The important field tests to be conducted are: 

 SPT Hammer Energy 

 Pressure Meter Testing 

 Shear wave velocity Measurement 

 Cone Penetrometer Test 

 Seismic Piezo cone Penetrometer 

The purpose of these laboratory and field tests are to define soil deposit details, hydraulic conditions, soil 

index properties, static and dynamic stress-strain soil behavior. 

Main Factors That Influence Site Effects 

Seismological: 

 Intensity and frequency characteristics of bed rocks in seismological environment. 

 Duration of bed rock motions. 

Geotechnical: 

 Nonlinear behavior of soils. 

 Elastic vibration characteristics of soils. 

Geometrical: 

 Topography of underlying bedrock. 

 Non-horizontal soil deposit layering. 

Geological: 

 Soil deposit thickness. 

 Type of under lying rock. 11 

Earthquake Characteristics 

The main effect of an earthquake is the horizontal forces that are generated in the structure. The horizontal 

ground accelerations give a measure of this force. The granular soils get compacted due to the vibrations. 

This in turn causes the settlement of the ground surface. Another effect of the vibrations is liquefaction. 

The degree of liquefaction depends on the relative density of the soil, percentage of fines, depth of water 

table and the ground acceleration. 

Effects of Earthquake 

 The dynamic stress and induced pore water pressure may reduce the bearing capacity of the soil 

 Loose granular soils are compacted by ground motion. This causes large subsidence of the ground 

surface. 

 Compaction of loose granular soil may induce excess pore water pressure, which causes 

liquefaction of soil. 

 The vibration due to earthquake may cause structural damage. 

Measures to prevent Liquefaction 

1. Compaction of loose soil 

 with vibratory rollers 

 compaction piles 

 vibro floatation 

 blasting 

2. Grouting and chemical stabilization. 

3. Application of surcharge. 

CODAL PROVISIONS 

For the design of foundation, the provisions of IS:1904-1986 in conjunctions with IS:1893-1984 shall 

generally be followed. 

1. The subgrade below the entire area of the building shall preferably be of the same type of the soil. 

Whenever this isn’t possible, a suitably located separation or crumple section shall be provided. 

2. Loose fine sand, soft silt and expansive soils should be avoided. If unavoidable, the building shall 

rest either on a rigid raft foundation or piles taken to a firm stratum. However, for light 

constructions the following measures may be taken to improve the soil on which the foundation of 

the building may rest: 

(a) Sand Piling 

(b) Soil Stabilization 

3. Isolated footings for columns 

All the individual footings or pile caps used in type III soft soils (Table 3 of IS:1893-1984), shall 

be connected by reinforced concrete ties at least in two directions approximately at right angles to 

each other. For buildings with no basement the ties may be placed at or below the plinth level and 12 

for buildings with basement they may be placed at the level of basement floor. They may be 

designed to carry the load of the panel walls also. 

4. Where ties are used, their sections shall be designed to carry in tension as well as in compression, 

an axial load not less than the earthquake force acting on the heavier of the columns connected, 

but the sections shall not be less than 200mm × 200mm with M15 concrete reinforced with 4 bars 

of 12mm dia plain mild steel bars or 10mm dia high strength deformed bars, one at each corner, 

bound by 6mm dia mild steel stirrups not more than 150mm apart. 

5. In the case of reinforced concrete slab, the thickness shall not be less than 1/50 th of the clear 

distance between the footings, but not less than 100mm in any case. It shall be reinforced with not 

less than 0.15% mild steel bars or 0.12% high strength deformed bars in each direction placed 

symmetrically at top and bottom. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 98

# UNIT IV 

# PILE FOUNDATION 

# INTRODUCTION 

The shallow foundations are used in case of small buildings or structures, which carry lesser loads, and hence the loads are dissipated into the soil mass at much lower depth. However when we are considering large structures, which carry heavy loads, the loads are dissipated at greater depths where usually the soil bearing capacity is quite high. One guideline of differentiating between the shallow and deep foundations is that in case of the deep foundations the depth of foundations is more than the dimension of the structure (usually the width is considered as the dimension). 

Deep foundations are of the following types: 

- Deep footings. 

- Piles. 

- Piers. 

- Caissons /Well foundations. 

Requirements for Deep Foundations 

Generally for structures with load > 10 t/m 210, we go for deep foundations. Deep foundations are used in the following cases: 

- Huge vertical load with respect to soil capacity. 

- Very weak soil or problematic soil. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 99

- Huge lateral loads eg. Tower, chimneys. 

- Scour depth criteria. 

- For fills having very large depth. 

- Uplift situations (expansive zones) 

- Urban areas for future large and huge construction near the existing building. 

# TYPES OF PILES AND THEIR FUNCTION 

Piles may be classified in a number of ways based on different criteria: (i) function or action, (ii) composition and material and (iii) installation. 

(I) FUNCTION OR ACTION 

End-bearing piles : The load is transferred through the pile tip to a suitable bearing stratum. 

Friction piles : The load is transferred through a depth by skin friction along the surface area of the pile. 

Tension or uplift piles : Used to anchor structures subjected to uplift due to hydrostatic pressure or overturning moment due to horizontal forces. 

Compaction piles : Used to compact loose granular soils in order to increase the bearing capacity; a sand pile is used to form this type as it need not carry any load. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 100

Anchor piles : Used to provide anchorage against horizontal pull. 

Fender piles : Used to protect waterfront structures against impact from ships or other floating objects. 

Sheet piles : Commonly used as bulkheads or cut-off to reduce seepage and uplift in hydraulic structures. 

Batter piles : Used to resist horizontal and inclined forces, especially in waterfront structures. 

Laterally loaded piles : Used to support retaining walls, bridges and dams, and as fenders in docks and harbors. 

(II) COMPOSITION AND MATERIAL 

Timber piles : Timber of sound quality is used. Timber piles perform well in either fully dry condition or submerged condition. 

Steel piles: These are usually H-piles, pipe piles or sheet piles (rolled sections of regular shapes). 

Concrete piles: These may be precast or cast-in-situ. Precast piles are invariably reinforced. Cast-in-situ piles are installed by pre-excavation; the common types are Raymond pile, MacArthur pile and Franki pile. 

Composite piles: These are made of either concrete and timber or concrete and steel. They are used when part of pile is submerged under water. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 101

(III) INSTALLATION 

Driven piles: Timber, steel or precast concrete piles are driven into position by using pile-driving equipment. 

Cast-in-situ piles: Only concrete piles can be cast-in-situ. Piles are drilled and filled with concrete. Reinforcements can be added according to requirements. 

Driven and cast-in-situ piles: These are combination of both driven and cast-in-situ piles. Casing or shell mat be used. The Franki pile falls in this category. 

# FUNCTIONS OF PILE: 

The major uses of piles are: 

(i) to carry vertical compressive loads, 

(ii) to resist uplift loads 

(iii) toresist horizontal or inclined loads. 

Normally vertical piles are used to carry vertical compression loads coming from superstructures such as buildings, bridges etc. The piles are used in groups joined together by pile caps. The loads carried by the piles are transferred to the adjacent soil. If all the loads coming on the tops of piles are transferred to the tips, such piles are called end-bearing or point-bearing piles. However, if all the load is transferred to the soil along the length of the pile such piles are called friction piles. If, in the course of driving a pile into granular soils, the soil around the pile gets compacted, such piles are called compaction piles. Figure below shows MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 102

piles used for the foundation of a multistoried building to carry loads from the superstructure. Piles are also used to resist uplift loads. Piles used for this purpose are called tension piles or uplift piles or anchor piles. Uplift loads are developed due to hydrostatic pressure or overturning movement as shown in figure. Piles are also used to resist horizontal or inclined forces. Batter piles are normally used to resist large horizontal loads. 

Uses of Piles MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 103

# FACTORS INFLUENCING THE SELECTION OF PILE 

The selection of the type, length and capacity is usually made from estimation based on the soil conditions and the magnitude of the load. In large cities, where the soil conditions are well known and where a large number of pile foundations have been constructed, the experience gained in the past is extremely useful. Generally the foundation design is made on the preliminary estimated values. Before the actual construction begins, pile load tests must be conducted to verify the design values. The foundation design must be revised according to the test results. The factors that govern the selection of piles are: 

1. Length of pile in relation to the load and type of soil 

2. Character of structure 

3. Availability of materials 

4. Type of loading 

5. Factors causing deterioration 

6. Ease of maintenance 

7. Estimated costs of types of piles, taking into account the initial cost, life expectancy and cost of maintenance 

8. Availability of funds 

All the above factors have to be largely analyzed before deciding up on a particular type. 

# CARRYING CAPACITY OF SINGLE PILE: 

The ultimate bearing capacity, Q u, of a single vertical pile may be determined by any of the following methods. 

1. By the use of static bearing capacity equations MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 104

2. By the use of SPT and CPT values 

3. By field load tests 

4. By dynamic method 

The determination of the ultimate point bearing capacity, q b, of a deep foundation on the basis of theory is a very complex one since there are many factors which cannot be accounted for in the theory. The theory assumes that the soil is homogeneous and isotropic which is normally not the case. All the theoretical equations are obtained based on plane strain conditions. Only shape factors are applied to take care of the three-dimensional nature of the problem. Compressibility characteristics of the soil complicated the problem further. Experience and judgement are therefore very essential in applying any theory to a specific problem. The skin load Q, depends on the nature of the surface of the pile, the method of installation of the pile and the type of soil. An exact evaluation of QAs a difficult job even if the soil is homogeneous over the whole length of the pile. The problem becomes all the more complicated if the pile passes through soils of variable characteristics. 

> GENERAL THEORY FOR ULTIMATE BEARING CAPACITY

According to Vesic (1967), only punching shear failure occurs in deep foundations irrespective of the density of the soil so long as the depth-width ratio Lid is greater than 4 where L = length of pile and d =diameter (or width of pile). The types of failure surfaces assumed by different investigators are shown in the figure for the general shear failure condition. The detailed experimental study of Vesic indicates that the failure surfaces do not revert back to the shaft. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 105

The shapes of failure surfaces at the tips of piles as assumed by (a)Terzaghi, (b) Meyerhof, and (c) Vesic 

The total failure load ̅ u may be written as follows ̅ 

> u

= Q u + W p = Qb + Q f + W p - (1) 

where, Qu = load at failure applied to the pile 

Qb = base resistance 

Qf = shaft resistance 

Wp = weight of the pile. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 106

The general equation for the base resistance may be written as 

- (2) 

where, d = width or diameter of the shaft at base level 

= effective overburden pressure at the base level of the pile 

Ab= base area of pile 

c = cohesion of soil 

= effective unit weight of soil 

Nc, N ,N = bearing capacity factors which take into account the shape factor. 

# LOAD CARRYING CAPACITY OF PILES 

The load carrying capacity of a single pile can be estimated using, 

1. Static formulae 

2. Dynamic formulae 

3. From insitu tests - correlations with penetration test data 

4. Load tests MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 107

1. STATIC FORMULAE 

The static formulae for ultimate load carrying capacity of pile based on soil properties and pile geometry are as given in Eq(3) and Eq(4) for piles in granular soils and cohesive soils respectively. 

Piles in granular soils: 

The ultimate load Qu is given by 

𝑄 u = End bearing resistance 𝑄 p+ Skin resistance 𝑄 s

𝑄 u = 𝐴 p(0.5 𝛾𝐷𝑁 γ) + 𝐴 p( 𝜎 ’𝑁 q) + 𝑘𝐴 si( 𝜎 i’𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 ) - (3) 

where, Ap = Cross section area of pile. 

D = Stem diameter of pile. 

Nγ = Bearing capacity factor taken for general shear. 

Nq = Bearing capacity factor. 

𝜎 ’= Effective overburden pressure (Critical depth taken as 

15D for ø ≤30◦ and 20D for ϕ ≥40◦) 

k= Co-efficient of earth pressure. 

𝜎 i’ = Effective over burden pressure at middle of corresponding layer. 

δ = Angle of wall friction usually taken as ¾ ø of soil. 

Asi = Surface area of pile. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 108

Piles in cohesive soils 

The ultimate bearing Q u of piles in cohesive soils is given by the following formula 

Qu = End bearing resistance,Q p + Skin resistance, Q s

𝑄 u = 𝐴 p 𝑁 c𝐶 p + 𝛼 𝐴 si Csi - (4) 

where, NC = Bearing capacity factor in clays which is taken as 9 

(See Skempton’s curve) 

cp = Average cohesion at pile toe. 

άi = Adhesion factor. 

ci = Average cohesion of the ith layer on the side of the pile. 

Asi = Surface area of pile stem in the ith layer. 

άi ci = Adhesion between shaft of pile and clay. 

Piles in C-Ø soils 

Where the soil has large values of both c and ø (as for a true c- ø), we should use the conservative Terzaghi’ s bearing capacity factors to determine the load carrying capacity. 

𝑄 u = 𝐴 p 𝐶𝑁 c + 𝜎 vb 𝑁 q + 0.5 𝛾𝐷𝑁 𝛾 + Asαc + k ( 𝜎 vtan ϕ) - (5) 

where, Nc, Nq, Nγ = Terzaghi’s bearing capacity factors 

σvb, σv = Effective overburden pressure at base and pile shaft, irrespective of the critical depth. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 109

2. DYNAMIC FORMULAE 

Engineering News Formula: 

For Piles driven in soils there are a set of formulae based on the so-called Engineering News (1888) formula. 

Qu = - (6) 

where, Qu= Ultimate load capacity of the driven pile. 

W= Hammer weight (tons) 

H= Height of fall of hammer (cm) 

S= Final set (cm/blow) 

C= a constant depending on type of hammer (2.54 for drop hammer, 0.254 for steam hammer) 

ηh= efficiency of hammer(0.65 for steam hammer, 1.0 for drop hammer) 

For double-acting steam hammer 

The hammer weight W is replaced by W+ap, 

where, ‘a’ is the area of the piston (cm2 ) and p is the steam pressure (kg/cm2). 

Qa =

where, Qa= allowable load 

F is taken as 6. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 110

Hiley’s Modification of Wellington’s formula 

Qu = - (7) 

where, the terms W, H, ηh and S are the same as before. 

ηb is the efficiency of the hammer blow. 

ηh = if W > ep 

ηb = if W < ep 

Here P is the pile weight and e is the co-efficient of restitution, whose value is 0.4 for concrete and 0.5 for steel. 

The quantity C in Hiley’s formula is total elastic compression given by 

C = C 1 + C 2 + C 3

where, C1, C2, C3 are the compression of pile cap, pile shaft and soil respectively. 

Dynamic formulae are generally found to be less reliable than static formulae. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 111

# CAPACITY FROM INSITU TESTS 

BEARING CAPACITY OF PILES IN GRANULAR SOILS 

BASED ON SPT VALUE 

Meyerhof (1956) suggests the following equations for single piles in granular soils based on SPT values. 

For displacement piles: 

Qu = Q b + Q f = 40N cor (L/d)A b + 2  ̅ cor As - (8) 

For H-piles: 

Qu = 40N cor (L/d)A b +̅ cor As - (9) 

where, q b = 40 N cor (L/d) < 400 N cor - (10) 

For bored piles: 

Qu= 133N cor Ab+ 0.67  ̅ cor As - (11) 

where, Q u = ultimate total load in kN 

Ncor = average corrected SPT value below pile tip ̅ 

> cor

= corrected average SPT value along the pile shaft 

Ab = base area of pile in m2 (for H-piles including the soil between the flanges) 

As = shaft surface area in m2 MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 112

In English units Qu for a displacement pile is 

Qu(kip) = Q b+Q f= 0.8N cor (L/d)A b +0.4  ̅ cor As - (12) 

where, A b = base area in ft 2 and As = surface area in ft 2

and 0.80Ncor ( )Ab < 8N cor Ab(kip) 

A minimum factor of safety of 4 is recommended. The allowable load Qa is 

Qa = - (13) 

BEARING CAPACITY OF PILES BASED ON STATIC CONE 

PENETRATION TESTS (CPT) 

The cone penetration test may be considered as a small scale pile load test. As such the results of 

this test yield the necessary parameters for the design of piles subjected to vertical load. Various methods for using CPT results to predict vertical pile capacity have been proposed. The following methods will be discussed: 

1. Vander Veen's method. 

2. Schmertmann's method. 

In the Vander Veen et al., (1957) method, the ultimate end-bearing resistance of a pile is taken, equal to the point resistance of the cone. To allow for the variation of cone resistance which normally occurs, the MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 113

method considers average cone resistance over a depth equal to three times the diameter of the pile above the pile point level and one pile diameter below point level. Experience has shown that if a safety factor of 2.5 is applied to the ultimate end resistance as determined from cone resistance, the pile is unlikely to settle more than 15 mm under the working load (Tomlinson, 1986). The equations for ultimate bearing capacity and allowable load may be written as, 

pile base resistance, qb = q (cone) 

ultimate base capacity, Qb = A bqp

allowable base load, Qa =

where, q p = average cone resistance over a depth 4d and Fs = factor of 

safety. 

The skin friction on the pile shaft in cohesionless soils is obtained from the relationships established by Meyerhof (1956) as follows. 

For displacement piles, the ultimate skin friction, f s, is given by ̅

(kPa) 

and for H-section piles, the ultimate limiting skin friction is given by ̅

(kPa) MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 114

where, ̅ = average cone resistance in kg/cm2 over the length of the pile shaft under consideration. 

Meyerhof states that for straight sided displacement piles, the ultimate unit skin friction, f s, has a maximum value of 107 kPa and for H-sections, a maximum of 54 kPa (calculated on all faces of flanges and web). 

The ultimate skin load is 

Qf=A sfs - (14) 

The ultimate load capacity of a pile is 

Qu=Q b+Q f - (15) 

The allowable load is, 

𝑄 - (16) 

If the working load, Qa, obtained for a particular position of pile, is less than that required for the structural designer's loading conditions, then the pile must be taken to a greater depth to increase the skin friction f s or the base resistance q b.MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 115

# NEGATIVE SKIN FRICTION 

When a weak, compressible soil layer is sandwiched between hard layers, a pile passing through such a stratum may be subjected to an additional load due to compression of the weak layer. This compression may be caused by consolidation, fill placing, remolding during driving, or lowering of the water table. The portion of the pile within this layer is subjected to draw down force in addition to the structural loads. This force should be taken into account when designing the pile foundation. 

An approximate estimate of the force can be made by empirical formulae such as following 

Fd= force due to negative skin friction 

Fd= (perimeter*soil depth)*C u [for clays] 

Fd= 0.5(perimeter*(soil depth) 2*γKtan 𝛿 ) [for sands] 

Cu= undrained shear strength 

γ= unit weight of soil 

K= coefficient of earth pressure 

𝛿 = angle of internal friction. 

# UPLIFT CAPACITY 

Piles are also used to resist uplift loads. Piles used for this purpose are called tension piles, uplift piles or anchor piles. Uplift forces are developed due to hydrostatic pressure or overturning moments as shown in figure. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 116

Single pile subjected to uplift 

The figure shows a straight edged pile subjected to uplift force. The equation for the uplift force P ul may be written as 

Pul = W p + A sfs - (17) 

where, P ul = uplift capacity of pile, 

W = weight of pile, 

fs = unit resisting force 

As = effective area of the embedded length of pile. 

Uplift Resistance of Pile in Clay 

For piles embedded in clay, Eq. (17) may written as 

Pul = W p + A sα ̅ - (18) MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 117

where, ̅ = average undrained shear strength of clay along the pile shaft, 

α = adhesion factor (= cfl/cM), 

ca = average adhesion. 

Figure below gives the relationship between α and c u based on pull out test results as collected by Sowa (1970). As per Sowa, the values of c a

agree reasonably well with the values for piles subjected to compression loadings. 

Relationship between adhesion factor α and undrained shear strength cu (Source: Poulos and Davis, 1980) 

Uplift Resistance of Pile in Sand 

Adequate confirmatory data are not available for evaluating the uplift resistance of piles embedded in cohesionless soils. Ireland (1957) reports that the average skin friction for piles under compression loading and uplift loading are equal, but data collected by Sowa (1970) and MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 118

Downs and Chieurzzi (1966) indicate lower values for upward loading as compared to downward loading especially for cast-in-situ piles. Poulos and Davis (1980) suggest that the skin friction of upward loading may be taken as two-thirds of the calculated shaft resistance for downward loading. 

A safety factor of 3 is normally assumed for calculating the safe uplift load for both piles in clay and sand. 

# PILE GROUP 

NUMBER AND SPACING OF PILES IN A GROUP 

Very rarely are structures founded on single piles. Normally, there will be a minimum of three piles under a column or a foundation element because of alignment problems and inadvertent eccentricities. The spacing of piles in a group depends upon many factors such as, 

1. overlapping of stresses of adjacent piles, 

2. cost of foundation, 

3. efficiency of the pile group MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 119

Pressure isobars of piles 

The pressure isobars of a single pile with load Q acting on the top are shown in Fig. (a). When piles are placed in a group, there is a possibility the pressure isobars of adjacent piles will overlap each other as shown in Fig. (b). The soil is highly stressed in the zones of overlapping of pressures. With sufficient overlap, either the soil will fail or the pile group will settle excessively since the combined pressure bulb extends to a considerable depth below the base of the piles. It is possible to avoid overlap by installing the piles further apart as shown in Fig. (c). Large spacings are not recommended sometimes, since this would result in a larger pile cap which would increase the cost of the foundation. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 120

The spacing of piles depends upon the method of installing the piles and the type of soil. The piles can be driven piles or cast-in-situ piles. When the piles are driven there will be greater overlapping of stresses due to the displacement of soil. If the displacement of soil compacts the soil in between the piles as in the case of loose sandy soils, the piles may be placed at closer intervals. But if the piles are driven into saturated clay or silty soils, the displaced soil will not compact the soil between the piles. As a result the soil between the piles may move upwards and in this process lift the pile cap. Greater spacing between piles is required in soils of this type to avoid lifting of piles. When piles are cast-in-situ, the soils adjacent to the piles are not stressed to that extent and as such smaller spacings are permitted. 

Generally, the spacing for point bearing piles, such as piles founded on rock, can be much less than for friction piles since the high-point-bearing stresses and the superposition effect of overlap of the point stresses will most likely not overstress the underlying material nor cause excessive settlements. 

The minimum allowable spacing of piles is usually stipulated in building codes. The spacings for straight uniform diameter piles may vary from 2 to 6 times the diameter of the shaft. For friction piles, the minimum spacing recommended is 3d where d is the diameter of the pile. For end bearing piles passing through relatively compressible strata, the spacing of piles shall not be less than 2.5d. For end bearing piles passing through compressible strata and resting in stiff clay, the spacing may be increased to 3.5d. For compaction piles, the spacing may be Id. Typical arrangements of piles in groups are shown in figure. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 121

Typical arrangement of piles in group 

PILE GROUP EFFICIENCY 

The spacing of piles is usually predetermined by practical and economical considerations. The design of a pile foundation subjected to vertical loads consists of 

1. The determination of the ultimate load bearing capacity of the group, Q gu .

2. Determination of the settlement of the group, Sg, under an allowable load Q ga .MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 122

The ultimate load of the group is generally different from the sum of the ultimate loads of individual piles Q u.

The factor, 

𝐸 - (19) 

is called group efficiency which depends on parameters such as type of soil in which the piles are embedded, method of installation of piles i.e. either driven or cast-in-situ piles, and spacing of piles. 

There is no acceptable "efficiency formula" for group bearing capacity. There are a few formulae such as the Converse-Labarre formula that are sometimes used by engineers. These formulae are empirical and give efficiency factors less than unity. But when piles are installed in sand, efficiency factors greater than unity can be obtained as shown by Vesic (1967) by his experimental investigation on groups of piles in sand. There is not sufficient experimental evidence to determine group efficiency for piles embedded in clay soils. 

Efficiency of Pile Groups in Sand 

Vesic (1967) carried out tests on 4 and 9 pile groups driven into sand under controlled conditions. Piles with spacings 2, 3,4, and 6 times the diameter were used in the tests. The tests were conducted in homogeneous, medium dense sand. His findings are given in figure. The figure gives the following: MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 123

1. The efficiencies of 4 and 9 pile groups when the pile caps do not rest on the surface. 

2. The efficiencies of 4 and 9 pile groups when the pile caps rest on the surface. 

3. The skin efficiency of 4 and 9 pile groups. 

4. The average point efficiency of all the pile groups. 

It may be mentioned here that a pile group with the pile cap resting on the surface takes more load than one with free standing piles above the surface. In the former case, a part of the load is taken by the soil directly under the cap and the rest is taken by the piles. The pile cap behaves the same way as a shallow foundation of the same size. Though the percentage of load taken by the group is quite considerable, building codes have not so far considered the contribution made by the cap. 

Efficiency of pile groups in sand (Vesic, 1967) MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 124

It may be seen from the figure that the overall efficiency of a four pile group with a cap resting on the surface increases to a maximum of about 1.7 at pile spacings of 3 to 4 pile diameters, becoming somewhat lower with a further increase in spacing. A sizable part of the increased bearing capacity comes from the caps. If the loads transmitted by the caps are reduced, the group efficiency drops to a maximum of about 1.3. 

Very similar results are indicated from tests with 9 pile groups. Since the tests in this case were carried out only up to a spacing of 3 pile diameters, the full picture of the curve is not available. However, it may be seen that the contribution of the cap for the bearing capacity is relatively smaller. 

Vesic measured the skin loads of all the piles. The skin efficiencies for both the 4 and 9-pile groups indicate an increasing trend. For the 4-pile group the efficiency increases from about 1.8 at 2 pile diameters to a maximum of about 3 at 5 pile diameters and beyond. In contrast to this, the average point load efficiency for the groups is about 1.01. Vesic showed for the first time that the increasing bearing capacity of a pile group for piles driven in sand comes primarily from an increase in skin loads. The point loads seem to be virtually unaffected by group action. 

Pile Group Efficiency Equation 

There are many pile group equations. These equations are to be used very cautiously, and may in many cases be no better than a good guess. The Converse-Labarre Formula is one of the most widely used group-efficiency equations which is expressed as MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 125

𝐸 ( ) ( ) - (20) 

where, 

m = number of columns of piles in a group, 

n = number of rows, 

θ = tan -1 (d/s) in degrees, 

d = diameter of pile, 

s = spacing of piles center to center. 

VERTICAL BEARING CAPACITY OF PILE GROUPS EMBEDDED IN SANDS AND GRAVELS 

Driven piles: 

If piles are driven into loose sands and gravel, the soil around the piles to a radius of at least three times the pile diameter is compacted. When piles are driven in a group at close spacing, the soil around and between them becomes highly compacted. When the group is loaded, the piles and the soil between them move together as a unit. Thus, the pile group acts as a pier foundation having a base area equal to the gross plan area contained by the piles. The efficiency of the pile group will be greater than unity as explained earlier. It is normally assumed that the efficiency falls to unity when the spacing is increased to five or six diameters. Since present knowledge is not sufficient to evaluate the efficiency for different spacing of piles, it is conservative to assume an efficiency factor of unity for all practical purposes. We may, therefore, write MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 126

Qgu = nQ u

where n - the number of piles in the group. 

The procedure explained above is not applicable if the pile tips rest on compressible soil such as silts or clays. When the pile tips rest on compressible soils, the stresses transferred to the compressible soils from the pile group might result in over-stressing or extensive consolidation. The carrying capacity of pile groups under these conditions is governed by the shear strength and compressibility of the soil, rather than by the 'efficiency'' of the group within the sand or gravel stratum. 

Bored Pile Groups In Sand And Gravel: 

Bored piles are cast-in-situ concrete piles. The method of installation involves 

1. Boring a hole of the required diameter and depth, 

2. Pouring in concrete. 

There will always be a general loosening of the soil during boring and then too when the boring has to be done below the water table. Though bentonite slurry (sometimes called as drilling mud) is used for stabilizing the sides and bottom of the bores, loosening of the soil cannot be avoided. Cleaning of the bottom of the bore hole prior to concreting is always a problem which will never be achieved quite satisfactorily. Since bored piles do not compact the soil between the piles, the efficiency factor will never be greater than unity. However, for all practical purposes, the efficiency may be taken as unity. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 127

Pile Groups In Cohesive Soils: 

The effect of driving piles into cohesive soils (clays and silts) is very different from that of cohesionless soils. It has already been explained that when piles are driven into clay soils, particularly when the soil is soft and sensitive, there will be considerable remolding of the soil. Besides there will be heaving of the soil between the piles since compaction during driving cannot be achieved in soils of such low permeability. There is every possibility of lifting of the pile during this process of heaving of the soil. Bored piles are, therefore, preferred to driven piles in cohesive soils. In case driven piles are to be used, the following steps should be favored: 

1. Piles should be spaced at greater distances apart. 

2. Piles should be driven from the center of the group towards the edges, and 

3. The rate of driving of each pile should be adjusted as to minimize the development of pore water pressure. 

Experimental results have indicated that when a pile group installed in cohesive soils is loaded, it may fail by any one of the following ways: 

1. May fail as a block (called block failure). 

2. Individual piles in the group may fail. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 128

Block failure of a pile group in clay soil 

When piles are spaced at closer intervals, the soil contained between the piles move downward with the piles and at failure, piles and soil move together to give the typical 'block failure'. Normally this type of failure occurs when piles are placed within 2 to 3 pile diameters. For wider spacings, the piles fail individually. The efficiency ratio is less than unity at closer spacings and may reach unity at a spacing of about 8 diameters. 

The equation for block failure may be written as, 

Qgu = cN cAg + P gL ̅ - (21) 

where, 

c = cohesive strength of clay beneath the pile group, MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 129

̅

= average cohesive strength of clay around the group, 

L = length of pile, 

Pg = perimeter of pile group, 

Ag = sectional area of group, 

Nc = bearing capacity factor which may be assumed as 9 for deep foundations. 

The bearing capacity of a pile group on the basis of individual pile failure may be written as 

Qgu = nQ u - (22) 

where, 

n = number of piles in the group, 

Qu = bearing capacity of an individual pile. 

The bearing capacity of a pile group is normally taken as the smaller of the two given by Eqs.(21) and (22). 

SETTLEMENT OF PILE GROUP 

In Cohesionless Soil: The relation between the settlement of a group and a single pile at corresponding working loads may be expressed as 

Fg = S g / S - (23) 

where, 

F = group settlement factor, 

Sg = settlement of group, 

S = settlement of a single pile. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 130

Vesic (1967) obtained the curve given in figure by plotting F against Bid where d is the diameter of the pile and B, the distance between the center to center of the outer piles in the group (only square pile groups are considered). It should be remembered here that the curve is based on the results obtained from tests on groups of piles embedded in medium dense sand. It is possible that groups in much looser or much denser deposits might give somewhat different behavior. The group settlement ratio is very likely be affected by the ratio of the pile point settlement S to total pile settlement. 

Skempton et al., (1953) published curves relating F with the width of pile groups as shown in figure. These curves can be taken as applying to driven or bored piles. Since the abscissa for the curve in figure is not expressed as a ratio, this curve cannot directly be compared with Vesic's curve given in Fig. 15.28. According to the figure a pile group 3 m wide would settle 5 times that of a single test pile. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 131

In Cohesive Soil: The total settlements of pile groups may be calculated by making use of consolidation settlement equations. The problem involves evalu ating the increase in stress Δp beneath a pile group when the group is subjected to a vertical load Q g. The computation of stresses depends on the type of soil through which the pile passes. The methods of computing the stresses are explained below: 

1. The soil in the first group given in Fig. (a) is homogeneous clay. The load Qg is assumed to act on a fictitious footing at a depth 2/3L from the surface and distributed over the sectional area of the group. The load on the pile group acting at this level is assumed to spread out at a 2 Vert : 1 Horiz slope. 

2. In the second group given in (b) of the figure, the pile passes through a very weak layer of depth L 1 and the lower portion of length L 2 is embedded in a strong layer. In this case, the load Q is assumed to act at a depth equal to 2/3 L 2 below the surface of the strong layer and spreads at a 2 : 1 slope as before. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 132

3. In the third case shown in (c) of the figure, the piles are point bearing piles. The load in this case is assumed to act at the level of the firm stratum and spreads out at a 2 : 1 slope. 

Settlement of pile groups in clay soil 

UPLIFT CAPACITY OF A PILE GROUP 

The uplift capacity of a pile group, when the vertical piles are arranged in a closely spaced groups may not be equal to the sum of the uplift resistances of the individual piles. This is because, at ultimate load conditions, the block of soil enclosed by the pile group gets lifted. The manner in which the load is transferred from the pile to the soil is quite complex. A simplified way of calculating the uplift capacity of a pile group embedded in cohesionless soil is shown in Fig. (a). A spread of load of 1 Horiz : 4 Vert from the pile group base to the ground surface may be taken as the volume of the soil to be lifted by the pile group (Tomlinson, 1977). For simplicity in calculation, the weight of the pile embedded in the ground is assumed to be equal to that of the volume of MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 133

soil it displaces. If the pile group is partly or fully submerged, the submerged weight of soil below the water table has to be taken. 

In the case of cohesive soil, the uplift resistance of the block of soil in undrained shear enclosed by the pile group given in Fig. (b) has to be considered. The equation for the total uplift capacity P u of the group may be expressed by 

Pgu =2L(  ̅ +̅ )̅ u + W - (24) MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 134

where 

L = depth of the pile block ̅

and ̅ = overall length and width of the pile group ̅ 

> u

= average undrained shear strength of soil around the sides of the group 

W = combined weight of the block of soil enclosed by the pile group plus the weight of the piles and the pile cap. 

A factor of safety of 2 may be used in both cases of piles in sand and clay. 

The uplift efficiency E of a group of piles may be expressed as 

Egu =

where 

Pus = uplift capacity of a single pile 

n = number of piles in the group 

The efficiency E gu varies with the method of installation of the piles, length and spacing and the type of soil. The available data indicate that E gu increases with the spacing of piles. Meyerhof and Adams (1968) presented some data on uplift efficiency of groups of two and four model circular footings in clay. The results indicate that the uplift efficiency increases with the spacing of the footings or bases and as the MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 135

depth of embedment decreases, but decreases as the number of footings or bases in the group increases. How far the footings would represent the piles is a debatable point. For uplift loading on pile groups in sand, there appears to be little data from full scale field tests. 

# PILE LOAD TEST: 

Before finalizing the design, load tests are carried out on piles installed for the purpose on the site. These are called initial load tests. They are useful in determining the general suitability of the proposed pile foundation, comparing the load capacity obtained from formulae, and for a general check on the piling equipment to be used as well as on soil properties. 

Procedure for pile load test 

The pile head is chipped off to natural horizontal plane till sound concrete is met. The projecting reinforcement is cut off suitably and the top is finished smooth & level with plaster of Paris.Loading platform of 6.2m x 6.2m is constructed by using 2nos. of ISMB 500 as main girders and 21nos of ISMB 300 as secondary girders. 

The CG of platform is made to coincide with centre of pile. Platform thus constructed is loaded with sand bags for required weight. A 20mm thick mild steel plate is placed on the top of pile head, Hydraulic jack of 250T Capacity is placed centrally on top of the plate. The gap between the top of jack and bottom of main girders is filled with steel packing materials. The Hydraulic pump is connected to jack by flexible pressure hose. Calibrated pressure gauge is connected to MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 136

hydraulic pump. Datum bars of heavy sections were placed very near to pile head and are supported on ends at a distance of 2m on either side from face of the pile. Two numbers of settlement gauges are placed on pile head at diametrical opposite locations with the help of magnetic bases fixed on datum bars. 

The pump is operated till the ram of jack touches the bottom of main girders. At this stage the pressure gauge reading is zero and dial gauge reading are adjusted for zero loading. The loads are then applied in increments of 20% of safe load. For each increment of load the dial gauge reading are taken at intervals of 15 minutes, till the rate of settlement is less than 0.1 mm in the first half hour or 0.2 mm in one hour of for a maximum period of 2hrs. Then the next increment of load is applied and the procedure repeated till the test load is reached. This load is maintained for 24 hours and hourly settlement readings are noted. At the end of 24 hours, unloading is done gradually till the entire load is released. 

INTERPRETATION OF PILE LOAD TEST: 

There are different methods for determining the allowable loads on a single pile which can be determined by making use of load test data. If the ultimate load can be determined from load-settlement curves, allowable loads are found by dividing the ultimate load carried by a pile by suitable factor of safety which varies from 2 to 3. Normally a factor safety is 2.5 is recommended. MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 137

Determination of Ultimate load from load-settlement curve 

1. The ultimate load, Q u can be determined as the abscissa of the point where the curved part of the load-settlement curve changes to falling straight line, Fig.a) 

2. Qu is the abscissa of the point of intersection of the initial and final tangents of the load settlement curve, Fig.(b) 

3. The allowable load Q a is 50 percent of the ultimate load at which the total settlement amounts to one-tenth of the diameter of the pile. 

4. The allowable load Q a is sometimes taken as equal to two-thirds of the load which causes a total settlement of 12mm. 

5. The allowable load Q a is sometimes taken as equal to two-thirds of the load which causes a net settlement of 6mm. 

# UNDER-REAMED PILES 

These are bored, cast in-situ, concrete piles with one or more bulbs formed by enlarging the pile stem. They are suitable for loose and filled up sites, or where soils are weak or expansive like black cotton soil. 

The bulbs are located at depths where good bearing strata are available but they should not be placed too near the ground level. Bulb MSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 138

size is usually 2 to 3 times the pile stem diameter. The bulb provides a large bearing area, increasing the pile load capacity. They are also effective in resisting the downward drag due to the negative skin friction that arises in loose or expansive soils. Bulb spacing should not exceed 1.5 times the bulb diameter. 

Procedure for Construction of Under-Reamed Piles 

The hole is drilled to the full required depth using augers. The under reaming tool consists of a link mechanism attached to a vertical rod with a handle at the top and connected to a bucket at the bottom. The link mechanism incorporates cutting blades. The under reaming tool is inserted into the hole. When the central rod is pressed by the handle the mechanism actuates the cutting blades to open out. The mechanism is now made to rotate keeping the handle under pressure. The blades now scrap the soil from the sides of the hole which falls into the bucket below. The rotation under pressure is continued until the full amount of soil forming the bulb is removed which is identified by the free rotation of the mechanism. The volume of the bucket is such that it gets filled when the bulb is fully formed. The handle is now tightened which makes the link mechanism to collapse back into the position. The under reamed tool is now withdrawn, the reinforcement cage inserted and the hole concreted. 

CAPACITY UNDER COMPRESSION 

The load carrying of a single under-reamed pile under compression maybe obtained as follows, 

Qu = Q b + Q f = A bqb + A sfsMSAJCE PILE FOUNDATION 

> 139

where, 

Ab = sectional area of bulb 

qb = base resistance per unit area of the bulb 

As = surface area of the embedded shaft of the pile 

fs = unit skin friction 

CAPACITY UNDER HYDROSTATIC UPLIFT 

Under-reamed piles are also used as anchor piles to take up hydrostatic uplift pressure exerted on submerdged structures and as tension piles to take up uplift loads under tall towers subjected to moments. The equation for uplift load foe a double under-reamed pile is 

Qup = A sfs + A sfs + W p

where, 

Wp = weight of the pile 

fs = 50% of fs for compression piles RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 140

# UNIT V 

# RETAINING WALLS 

# BASIC TERMINOLOGY 

Introduction 

Soil is neither a solid nor a liquid, but it exhibits some of the characteristics of both. One of the characteristics similar to that of a liquid is its tendency to exert a lateral pressure against any object in contact. This important property influences the design of retaining walls, abutments, bulkheads, sheet pile walls, basement walls and underground conduits which retain or support soil, and, as such, is of very great significance. Retaining walls are constructed in various fields of civil engineering, such as hydraulics and irrigation structures, highways, railways, tunnels, mining and military engineering. 

Retaining structures: 

The structure used to retain or support the material/soil is called retaining structure. e.g. retaining walls, which may be of RCC, brick or stone masonry or sheet piling etc. 

Retaining walls: 

A retaining wall is a structure designed to sustain the material pressure of earth or other materials as grains, ores, etc. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 141

Surcharge: 

The material which lies above the horizontal level of the retaining structure is known as surcharge. The angle which this material makes with the retaining wall is called surcharge angle. 

# LATERAL EARTH PRESSURE 

In 1929 Terzaghi (The Father of Soil Mechanics) conducted experiments on the retaining wall and showed the relation of pressure on the wall if wall changes its position i.e. to move inwards to the backfill, outwards of it or remain at its place. There are three types of earth pressures on the basis of the movement of the wall. 

1. Earth Pressure at rest 

2. Active Earth Pressure 

3. Passive Earth Pressure 

These are explained below 

Pressure at rest: 

When the wall is at rest and the material is in its natural state then the pressure applied by material is known as Earth Pressure at Rest. It is represented by Po. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 142

Active earth pressure 

When the wall moves away from the backfill, there is a decrease in the pressure on the wall and this decrease continues until a minimum value is reach after which there is no reduction in the pressure and the value will become constant. This kind of pressure is known as active earth pressure. 

Passive earth pressure 

When the wall moves towards the backfill, there is an increase in the pressure on the wall and this increase continues until a maximum value is reach after which there is no increase in the pressure and the value will become constant. This kind of pressure is known as passive earth pressure. 

This means that when the wall is about to slip due to lateral thrust from the backfill, a resistive force is applied by the soil in front of the wall. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 143

The magnitude of lateral earth pressure depends on: 

1. Shear strength characteristics of soil 

2. Lateral strain condition 

3. Pore water pressure 

4. State of Equilibrium of soil 

5. Wall and ground surface shape 

Soil state of Equilibrium 

The state of Equilibrium of soil can be divided into two states: 

a) State of Elastic Equilibrium 

When a small change in stress produces a corresponding small change in strain. 

b) State of Plastic Equilibrium 

When irreversible strain takes place at a constant stress. 

The strain state relating to earth pressure calculation falls into three categories: 

a) At Rest State: 

It is the case when state of elastic Equilibrium with no lateral displacement occurs (Figure 1). RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 144

b) Active state: 

It is the case when plastic equilibrium with lateral expansion takes place (wall moves outward from the soil). (Figure 2). c) Passive state: 

Plastic equilibrium with lateral contraction takes place (wall moves toward the soil). (Figure 2) Figure 1 

Figure 2 RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 145

Earth Pressure at rest (ko condition ) 

lateral strain , ε h = 0 

Where, 

ko = coefficient of lateral earth presser at rest. ko

depends on : 

 Soil type ( sand, silt, clay) 

 Loading –Unloading history 

 Relative density of soil 

For normally consolidated soil (N.C.) and sand 

For over consolidated soil (O.C.) 

√

where 

OCR is the over consolidated ratio 

Where 

is Poisson ratio RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 146

In this case ,the mohr circle is below the shear envelope of this soil (Figure 3). 

Figure 3 

Active Earth pressure (Rankine’s Active state ) 

Rankine’s theory neglects friction between soil and wall .when the wall moves outward from the soil, the lateral earth pressure starts to be reduced until it reaches its minimum value. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 147

Figure 4 

( )

where , 

ka = coefficient of active earth pressure. (Figure 4) 

And in this case , the failure plane makes ( 45 – Ø/2 ) with the direction of the major principal plane ( usually horizontal axes ) . 

Rankin e’s Passive State 

If the wall moved toward the soil , the passive condition will take place.The passive pressure will increase until it reaches its maximum value of: 

Where 

kp= coefficient of passive earth pressure 

( )

and in this case , the failure place makes ( 45 + Ø/2 ) with the direction of the major principal plane. 

Earth pressure Distribution for Sand 

In general, the active earth pressure distribution in sand will be: RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 148

Figure (5) However the distribution and value of passive earth pressure in sand is, Figure(5). 

(b) For clay 

The value of active earth pressure is (Figure 6) 

Figure(6) RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 149

where , c = soil cohesion The passive pressure values are (Figure 7) 

√

√

Figure(7) RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 150

Effect of Ground Water Table 

Static water table Figure 8 For static water table the water pressure should be treated separately from soil lateral pressure as shown in Figure(8) 

where 

γsub = submerged unit weight of soil = γsat - γwRETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 151

# RANKINE’S THEORY 

The following are the important assumptions in Rankine’s theory: 

1. The soil mass is semi-infinite, homogeneous, dry and cohesion less. 

2. The ground surface is a plane which may be horizontal or inclined. 

3. The face of the wall in contact with the backfill is vertical and smooth. In other words, the friction between the wall and the backfill is neglected (these amounts. 

4. The wall yields about the base sufficiently for the active pressure conditions to develop; if it is the passive case that is under consideration, the wall is taken to be pushed sufficiently towards the fill for the passive resistance to be fully mobilized. (Alternatively, it is taken that the soil mass is stretched or gets compressed adequately for attaining these states, respectively. Friction between the wall and fill is supposed to reduce the active earth pressure on the wall and increase the passive resistance of the soil. Similar is the effect of cohesion of the fill soil). Thus it is seen that, by neglecting wall friction as also cohesion of the backfill, the geotechnical engineer errs on the safe side in the computation of both the active pressure and passive resistance. Also, the fill is usually of cohesionless soil, wherever possible, from the point of view of providing proper drainage. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 152

EARTH PRESSURE ON RETAINING WALLS: COHESIONLESS BACKFILL 

Active Earth Pressure 

a) Dry backfill with no surcharge 

Where, γ= bulk unit weight of soil above the water table 

At the base of the wall, where z= H RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 153

The total active thrust is given by the following equation, 

acting at a height of H/3 above the base of the wall. 

b) Submerged backfill 

If the backfill is submerged by the presence of the natural water table at a depth of H1 from the top, the active earth pressure up to the depth H1 is determined according to the above equation. For the submerged backfill, the lateral earth pressure at any depth is the sum of 

1. Active earth pressure due to submerged unit weight of the soil 

mass γ’ and 

2. Hydrostatic pressure 

c) Effect of uniform surcharge 

If a uniformly distributed surcharge load of intensity q per unit area is acting over the surface of the backfill, it is assumed that the effective vertical pressure p v is increased by q. Hence the increase in active pressure is uniform throughout the back of the wall and is equal to magnitude K aq. 

Where, 

= vertical pressure at a given depth RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 154

d) Effect of Sloping ground surface 

The active earth pressure at a depth z acting parallel to slope is given by 

√

√

Total active thrust acting on the wall is given by 

e) Case of inclined wall 

When the back of the wall has batter, the following procedure can be adopted to determine the earth pressure. The height of the vertical plane AB is used in calculating P A.

√

Passive Earth Pressure 

When the backfill is horizontal and the soil is dry sand, passive earth pressure at a depth z is given by, RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 155

Hence the total passive resistance P p for the full height H of the retaining wall is 

If the uniform surcharge load q is applied over the surface, passive earth pressure is increased by K pq at every depth.When the backfill has sloping 

surface inclined at β to the horizontal, it can be shown t hat the passive earth pressure p p at a depth z is given by, 

Where 

√

√

The total passive resistance P p for a wall height H is given by RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 156

EARTH PRESSURE ON RETAINING WALLS: COHESIVE BACKFILL 

Active Earth Pressure 

√

At z=0 and √

And at z = z 0 = √RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 157

In calculating the total active thrust on the wall, the tension zone is usually ignored and only the area of the pressure distribution between depths z 0 and H. 

√

The net total active thrust is zero for a depth equal to 2z 0. In cohesive soil, a vertical cut can be made upto a depth of 2z 0 without having to provide any lateral support. Thus, the critical depth of vertical cut H cnin a cohesive soil is given by 

> √

Passive Earth Pressure 

√

The total passive earth pressure for the full height H of the wall is given by 

√RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 158

# COULOMB’S WEDGE THEORY AND CRITICAL 

# FAILURE PLANE 

The primary assumptions in Coulomb’s wedge theory are as follows: 

1. The backfill soil is considered to be dry, homogeneous and isotropic; it is elastically undeformable but breakable, granular material, possessing internal friction but no cohesion. 

2. The rupture surface is assumed to be a plane for the sake of convenience in analysis. It passes through the heel of the wall. It is not actually a plane, but is curved and this is known to Coulomb. 

3. The sliding wedge acts as a rigid body and the value of the earth thrust is obtained by considering its equilibrium. 

4. The position and direction of the earth thrust are assumed to be known. The thrust acts on the back of the wall at a point one-third of the height of the wall above the base of the wall and makes an angle 

δ, with the normal to the back face of the wall. This is an angle of 

friction between the wall and backfill soil and is usually called ‘wall friction’. 

5. The problem of determining the earth thrust is solved, on the basis of two-dimensional case of ‘plane strain’. This is to say that, the 

retaining wall is assumed to be of great length and all conditions of the wall and fill remain constant along the length of the wall. Thus, a unit length of the wall perpendicular to the plane of the paper is considered. 

6. When the soil wedge is at incipient failure or the sliding of the wedge is impending, the theory gives two limiting values of earth RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 159

pressure, the least and the greatest (active and passive), compatible with equilibrium. The additional inherent assumptions relevant to the theory are as follows: 

7. The soil forms a natural s lope angle, φ, with the horizontal, without 

rupture and sliding. This is called the angle of repose and in the case of dry cohesion less soil; it is nothing but the angle of internal friction. The concept of friction was understood by Coulomb. 

8. If the wall yields and the rupture of the backfill soil takes place, a soil wedge is torn off from the rest of the soil mass. In the active case, the soil wedge slides sideways and downward over the rupture surface, thus exerting a lateral pressure on the wall. In the case of passive earth resistance, the soil wedge slides sideways and upward on the rupture surface due to the forcing of the wall against the fill. 

9. For a rupture plane within the soil mass, as well as between the back 

of the wall and the soil, Newton’s l aw of friction is valid (that is to say, the shear force developed due to friction is the coefficient of friction times the normal force acting on the plane). This angle of friction, whose tangent is the coefficient of friction, is dependent upon the physical properties of the materials involved. 

10. The friction is distributed uniformly on the rupture surface. 

11. The back face of the wall is a plane. 

Limitations of coulomb’s theory 

Also note that Coulomb’s theory treats the soil mass in the sliding 

wedge in its entirety. The assumptions permit one to treat the problem as a 

statically determinate one. Coulomb’s theory is applicable to inclined wall RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 160

faces, to a wall with a broken face, to a sloping backfill curved backfill surface, broken backfill surface and to concentrated or distributed 

surcharge loads. One of the main deficiencies in Coulomb’s theory is that, 

in general, it does not satisfy the static equilibrium condition occurring in nature. The three forces (weight of the sliding wedge, earth pressure and soil reaction on the rupture surface) acting on the sliding wedge do not meet at a common point, when the sliding surface is assumed to be planar. Even the wall friction was not originally considered but was introduced only some time later. Regardless of this deficiency and other assumptions, the theory gives useful results in practice; however, the soil constants should be determined as accurately as possible. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 161

# CULMANN’S GRAPHICAL METHOD 

This graphical method given by Culmann (1886) is more general 

than Rebhann’s method and is very convenient to use in the case of layered backfill, backfill with breaks at surface and different types of surcharge load. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 162

The steps involved in the Culmann’s method are as follows: 

1. Given height H and batter angle θ, the back AB of the wall is 

constructed. 

2. Through A, the surcharge line (β -line) is drawn inclined at angle β to 

the horizontal. 

3. Through B, the repose line ( -line) is drawn inclined at an angle to the horizontal. 

4. Agai n through B, the Ψ -line is drawn inclined at an angle Ψ to the -

line ( Ψ = 90° -θ - δ). RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 163

5. Trial slip planes BC1, BC2…… are drawn. The weights of the wedges ABC1, ABC2…… are calculated and plotted to scale as BE1,BE2,…… on the -line. 

6. Through E1, E2,…. lines are drawn parallel to Ψ -line, intersecting 

BC1, BC2,……. at F1, F2..... respectively. 

7. A smooth curve is drawn through points B, F1, F2…… This curve is 

called Culmann line. 

8. A line is drawn parallel to -line and tangential to Culmann line. Let it touch Culmann line at F. BF is joined and produced to intersect the 

β-line at C. Then BC is the critical slip plane. 

9. Through F, line FE is drawn parallel to Ψ -line, intersecting -line at E. 

10. The weight W of the wedge ABC is calculated. The resultant active earth pressure Pa is given by 

( )

SPECIAL CASES: 

(i) Backfill with uniform surcharge load. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 164

As an illustration consider in which uniformly distributed surcharge load of intensity q is shown acting over a length L. The procedure is similar to the previous case but for the following changes. 

1. BE1 represent the sum of weight of wedge ABC1 and surcharge load q(AC1). 

2. BE2 represents the sum of weight of wedge ABC2 and surcharge load qL. Similarly BE3, BE4 represent the sum of respective sliding wedges and surcharge load Lq. 

3. The resultant active earth pressure is given by 

( )RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 165

Where, 

w = weight of wedge ABC + qL 

ii) Backfill with line load 

As an illustration, consider Fig. in which a line load of intensity q1 (per unit run) acts at distance d from top of wall. Example of line load is load due to any wall or a railway track running parallel to retaining wall. In the Fig. B, F1, F2…… Fn is Culmann line obtained without considering line 

load. BC then represents the critical slip plane and the resultant active pressure is given by, RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 166

( )………………. (1) 

Where, 

w = weight of wedge ABC 

If we consider the line load then E′, E3….. will get shifted to E′′, E 3’… with E′ E′′ =E 3 E3’ = ….. q. There is an abrupt change in the Culmann line from F1 to F′ and BF1F2F′F′′….. n represents Culmann line obtained 

considering the line load. If E′′F′′ is greater than EF, slip occurs along BC′ 

and the resultant active earth pressure is given by 

( )……………… (2) 

where , 

W′ = ( weight of wedge ABC′) + q. On the other hand if E′′F′′ is less than 

EF, slip occurs along BC and Pa is given by Eqn (1). RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 167

# STABILITY OF RETAINING WALLS 

Stability against overturning 

> ∑
> ∑

∑

∑

∑ ( )RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 168

Calculation for overturning moment 

Section  Area  Weight per unit length 

Moment arm from C  Moment about C 

1 A1  X1 

2 A2  X2 

3 A3  X3 

4 A4  X4 

5 A5  X5 

6 A6  X6 

PV V

∑V=  ∑ =

Stability against Sliding 

> ∑
> ∑

∑

∑ ∑

∑

Stability against Bearing capacity 

∑ [ ]RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 169

∑ [ ]

Factor of safety = 

# PROBLEMS 

Example 1 :A retaining wall with a smooth vertical back is 10 m high and retains a two layer of sand backfill with the following properties: 

0-5 m depth : Φ=30°, γ = 18 KN/m 3

Below 5 m : Φ=34°, γ = 20 KN/m 3

Show the active earth pressure distribution assuming the water table is well below the base of wall 

Solution 

When the backfill consists of more than one soil layer, the lateral earth pressure distribution for each of the layer is worked out and a combined diagram should be drawn. At the interface of two layers, there will be a break in the pressure distribution diagram, since there will be two value of pressure the upper layer will act as an overburden for the bottom layer. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 170

Ka1 for upper layer = = = 0.333 

Ka2 for lower layer = = = 0.283 

Active pressure distribution for the upper layer: 

Z= 0 m ; vertical pressure P v=0 and P A= 0 

Z= 5 m ; vertical pressure P v=18 x 5 =18 KN/m 2

And 

PA= K a1 Pv = 0.333 x 90 = 30 KN/m 2

Active pressure distribution for the lower layer 

Z = 5 m; Vertical pressure P v = 90 KN/m 2

PA = K a2 Pv = 0.283 x 90 = 25.47 KN/m 2

Z = 10 m; Vertical pressure P v = 90 + (20 x 5) = 190 KN/m 2

PA = K a2 Pv = 0.283 x 190 = 53.77 KN/m 2

Example 2: A retaining wall 8 m high, with a smooth vertical back, retains 

a clay backfill with c’= 15 KN/m 2, Φ’= 15°, γ = 18 KN/m 3. Calculate the total active thrust on the wall assuming that tension cracks may develop to the full theoretical depth. RETAINING WALLS MSAJCE 

> 171

Solution 

The active pressure at a depth z in a c-Φ soil is given by 

√

= 0.558 

At 

z =0, p v=0 ; 

pA= -2 x 15 √ = -23 KN/m 2

At z = 8 m 

pv = 18 x 8 = 144 KN/m 2

pA= 0.588 x 18 x 8 – 23 = 61.67 KN/m 2

pA=0 and 

√

√

PA = ⁄

