# CE8502 LP

Title: LP CE 8502 SA I.xlsx

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LessonPlan/CE8502-LP.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 05 Dec 2022 15:58:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
1 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

2 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

3 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

4 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

5 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

6 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

7 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

8 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

9 1 CO1 PO1-PO3 

10 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

11 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

12 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

L3 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB 

L2 

Influence lines for member forces 

in pin-jointed frames 

Influence lines for shear force and 

bending moment in beam sections 

Topic(s) 

Course Outcome 

Analyse beams, Frames and trusses using Energy method 

Analyse of structural elements using moving loads and influence lines 

Analyse of arches 

> CO

Problems on indeterminate continuous 

beam 

Problems on indeterminate continuous 

beam 

UNIT II MOVING LOADS AND INFLUENCE LINES 

Suggested Activity: Problems on Analysis of continuous beams and frames by Energy Method 

Evaluation method : Paper base evaluation 

PO 

Lesson Plan 

Analyse of structural elements using slope deflection method 

Analyse of structural elements using moment distribution method 

Sl. No. Periods 

> Required

BB L3 

BB L3 

Degree of static indeterminacies for plane 

frames 

Degree of kinematic indeterminacies for 

plane frames 

Analysis of indeterminate pin-jointed 

frames – energy method 

Problems on indeterminate pin-jointed 

frames 

Analysis of indeterminate rigid-jointed 

frames - energy method 

T2 

T2 

T2 BB L2 

T2 BB 

Name of the 

Subject  

> Blooms Level (L1-
> L6)
> Mode of Teaching
> (BB / PPT / NPTEL
> / MOOC / etc )

UNIT I ENERGY METHOD 

> T / R*
> Book

L2 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

Influence lines for reactions in statically 

determinate structures 

Problems on indeterminate rigid-jointed 

frames 

Analysis of indeterminate continuous 

beam 

T2 

01/02/2021 

0LESSON PLAN - THEORY 

MOHAMED SATHAK A J COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING 

Chennai 603103 

Fromat no. 

Rev.Date 

Rev. No. 

Course Objective 

To introduce the students to basic theory and concepts of structural analysis and the classicalmethods for the analysis of buildings. 

Department of Civil Engineering 

Name of the 

handling Faculty 

Year / Sem 

Mr B.Rizha ur Rahman 

Structural Analysis I 

CE8502 III / V 

Subject Code 

TLP 05 

L3 

L3 

BB 

BB 

T2 

T2 

BB 13 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

14 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

15 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

16 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

17 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

18 1 CO2 PO1-PO3 

19 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

20 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

21 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

22 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

23 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

24 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

25 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

26 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

27 1 CO3 PO1-PO3 

28 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

29 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

30 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

31 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

32 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

33 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

34 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

35 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

36 1 CO4 PO1-PO3 

Suggested Activity: Assignment - Problems on Arches 

Evaluation method : Paper base evaluation 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

BB 

BB 

L3 

L3 

L3 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

BB 

Suggested Activity:Assignment - Problems on moving loads and influence lines. 

Evaluation method : Paper base evaluation 

T2 L3 

T2 BB L2 

Calculation of critical stress resultants 

due to concentrated loads. 

Calculation of critical stress resultants 

due to distributed moving loads. 

Muller Breslau‟s principle. 

Influence lines principle for continuous 

beams 

Problems on Continuous beams 

UNIT III ARCHES 

UNIT IV SLOPE DEFLECTION METHOD 

Analysis of continuous beam 

Problems on Continuous beams 

Problems on rigid frames ( with sway) 

Analysis of rigid frames ( with sway) 

Analysis of fixed arches - Circular 

Arches - settlement 

Indirect model analysis for influence lines 

of indeterminate structures 

UNIT V MOMENT DISTRIBUTION METHOD 

T2 BB L3 

Analysis of rigid frames ( without sway) 

Problems on rigid frames ( without sway) 

T2 BB L2 

T2 BB 

Arches - Temperature effects 

Slope deflection method – introduction 

Suggested Activity: Assignment - Problems on slope and deflection 

Evaluation method : Paper base evaluation 

Problems on rigid frames ( with sway) 

Arch structures - Introduction 

Analysis of three hinged arches -

Parabolic 

T2 BB L3 

T2 

T2 

T2 

BB 

BB 

BB 

L3 

L3 

L3 

Analysis of three hinged arches - Circular 

L3 

L3 

L2 

L3 

L3 

BB 

BB 

BB 

BB 

BB 

Analysis of two hinged arches - parabolic 

Analysis of two hinged arches - Circular 

Influence lines principle for continuous 

beams and single storey rigid frames 

T2 

T2 

T2 

T2 

T2 

T2 

Analysis of fixed arches - Parabolic 

T2 

BB L3 T2 

T2 

T2 

BB 

BB 

L3 

L3 37 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

38 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

39 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

40 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

41 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

42 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

43 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

44 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

45 1 CO5 PO1-PO3 

1

2

1

2

1

2

3

4

5

1

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5 L6 LOT HOT Total 

0 2 7 0 0 0 9 0 9

0 2 7 0 0 0 9 0 9

0 1 8 0 0 0 9 0 9

0 1 8 0 0 0 9 0 9

0 1 8 0 0 0 9 0 9

0 7 38 0 0 0 45 0 45 

0 15.556 84.4444 0 0 0 100 0 100 

T2 

T2 BB L2 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

T2 BB L3 

Problems on Continuous beams 

Ghali.A, Nebille,A.M. and Brown,T.G. “Structural Analysis” A unified classical and Matrix approach” 6th edition. Spon Press, London 

and New York, 2013. 

Analysis of rigid frames ( without sway) 

Problems on rigid frames ( with sway) 

Slope deflection method – introduction 

Analysis of continuous beam 

Problems on Continuous beams 

BB L3 

Suggested Activity: Assignment - Problems on Moment Distribution Method 

Evaluation method : Paper base evaluation 

Blooms Level 

Level 1 (L1) : Remembering 

Level 3 (L3) : Applying 

Unit Name 

ENERGY METHOD 

MOVING LOADS AND INFLUENCE LINES 

ARCHES 

SLOPE DEFLECTION METHOD 

Coates R.C, Coutie M.G. and Kong F.K., “Structural Analysis”, ELBS and Nelson, 1990 

William Weaver Jr. & James M. Gere, "Matrix Analysis of Framed Structures", CBS Publishers and Distributors, Delhi, 2004 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101085/ 

Website / URL References 

Content Beyond the Syllabus Planned 

Analysis of 3D frames 

Comparison of slope deflection method with other classical method 

Pandit G.S. & Gupta S.P. "Structural Analysis – A Matrix Approach", Tata McGraw Hill 2004. 

Gambhir. M.L., "Fundamentals of Structural Mechanics and Analysis"., PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2011. 

Text Books 

Vaidyanathan, R. and Perumal, P., “Comprehensive structural Analysis – Vol. I & II”, Laxmi Publications, New Delhi, 2003 

BhavaiKatti, S.S, “Structural Analysis – Vol. 1 Vol. 2”, Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 

Reference Books 

Fixed 

Hour 

Exams 

Level 5 (L5) : Evaluating 

MOMENT DISTRIBUTION METHOD 

Lower 

Order 

Thinki 

ng 

Higher 

Order 

Thinking 

Projects / Mini 

Projects 

Total 

Mapping syllabus with Bloom’s Taxonomy LOT and HOT 

Unit 1 

Unit 2 

Unit 3 

Unit 4 

Level 2 (L2) : Understanding 

Unit 5 

Unit No 

Total Percentage 

Level 4 (L4) : Analysing 

Level 6 (L6) : Creating 

CO PO Mapping 

Problems on rigid frames ( without sway) 

Analysis of rigid frames ( with sway) 

Problems on rigid frames ( with sway) 

T2 

T2 

T2 

BB L3 

BB L3 

BB L3 PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 PO11 PO12 PSO1 PSO2  

> CO1

3 2 1 1 2 

> CO2

3 2 1 1 2 

> CO3

3 2 1 1 2 

> CO4

3 2 1 1 2 

> CO5

3 2 1 1 2       

> Avg 32112
> CO1
> CO2
> CO3
> CO4
> CO5
> *Kindly sign with date
> Low level
> Format No :231
> Name & Sign of Faculty Incharge :
> Name & Sign of Subject Expert :
> Head of the Department :

PO1 : Engineering Knowledge in different types of structures. , PO2 : Problem analysis of beams and frames 

using Moment Distribution Method, PSO1: Apply their skills to analyse structures, PSO2 : Apply their acquired 

professional skills to analyse structural components 

> Justification for CO-PO mapping

PO1 : Engineering Knowledge in different types of structures. , PO2 : Problem analysis in frames and trusses, 

PO3 : Design frames ,PSO1: Apply their skills to analyse structures, PSO2 : Apply their acquired professional 

skills to analyse structural components 

PO1 : Engineering Knowledge in different types of structures. , PO2 : Problem analysis in Moving loads and 

influence lines ,PSO1: Apply their skills to analyse structures, PSO2 : Apply their acquired professional skills to 

analyse structural components 

PO1 : Engineering Knowledge in different types of structures. , PO2 : Problem analysis in Arches, PSO1: Apply 

their skills to analyse structures, PSO2 : Apply their acquired professional skills to analyse structural components 

PO1 : Engineering Knowledge in different types of structures. , PO2 : Problem analysis of beams and frames 

using slope deflection method, PSO1: Apply their skills to analyse structures, PSO2 : Apply their acquired 

professional skills to analyse structural components

