# CE8603 QB

Title: CE8603-QB.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/QuestionBank/CE8603-QB.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 11:01:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 

# QUESTION BANK 

# Name of the Facu lty : Mrs. R. B. RAKESH 

# Subject : Irrigation Engineering 

# Regulation : 2017 

# Course Code : CE 8603 

# Branch : Civil Engineering 

# Ye ar & Semester : II I / VICE 8603 – IRRIGATION ENGINEERING 

Course Objectives 

The Student should be able 

S. No.  Course Objective 

1

The student is exposed to different phases in irrigation practices and Planning and management of 

irrigation. Further they will be imparted required knowledge on Irrigation storage and distribution 

canal system and Irrigation management. 

Course Outcomes: 

On Completion of the course the students will be able to 

CO No.  Course Outcome 

1 Have knowledge and skills o n crop water requirements. 

2 Understand the methods and management of irrigation. 

3 Gain knowledge on types of Impounding structures 

4 Understand methods of irrigation including canal irrigation 

5 Get knowledge on water management on optimization of wa ter use. 

BLOOMS TAXONOMY(BT  Level )

K1 -Remembering , K2 -Understanding, K3 -Applying, K4 -Analyzing, K5 -Evaluating ,K6 -Creating 

UNIT – 1

CROP WATER REQUIREMENT 

Part  A CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allot ted 

1.  What is meant by duty and delta?  CO1  KI  (A/M 17)  2

2.  What is irrigation water requirement of crops?  CO1  KI  2

3.  What is non -consumptive use of water?  CO1  KI  (A/M 17)  2

4.  What are the need for irrigation?  CO1  KI  (N/D -2017)  2

5.  Merits and demerits of irrigation?  CO1  KI  (A/M -16)  2

6.  What a re the classifications of irrigation?  CO1  KI  (A/M -16)  2

7.  Define Surcharge storage?  CO1  KI  (NOV/DEC  

> 2010)

2

8.  Define duty of water?  CO1  KI  (A/M 19)  2

9.  Define Evapotranspiration?  CO1  KI  (N/D -2017)  2

10.  What is consumptive use of water?  CO1  KI  (A/M 17)  2

Part B  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allo tted 1.  What is meant by Duty? List the factors affecting duty. How to 

improve duty?  CO 1  KI  (A/M -16 ) 13 

2.  Explain factors affecting consumptive use of  water ? CO 1  K2  ( A/M -2019 ) 13 

3.  Expalin about irriga tion requirements of crops ?  CO 1  K2  13 

4. 

Recommend a method for estimating the consumptive use of 

crops over a large area. Classify the consumptive use of 

water by crops based on its estimation during its specific 

period ? ( A/M - 2017 )

CO 1  K5 

( A/M -

2017)  13 

5.  Describe the necessity and importance of irrigation water in 

our country?  CO 1  K2  (A/M - 2017)  13 

6.  Estimation of Evapotranspiration using experimental methods ? CO 1  K5 

( A/M -

2017)  13 

7.  Define Irrigation? What are the benefits and ill effe cts of 

irrigation?  CO 1  K1  (N/D -2017)  13 

8.  List a short note on the factors influencing duty, delta, and base 

period ? (N/D -2016)  CO 1  K1  ((N/D -2016)  13 

UNIT -II 

IRRIGATION METHODS 

Part A  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allot ted 

1.  Define types of  irrigation methods?  CO 2  K1  (A/M -16)  2

2.  What are the different methods of sub su rface irrigation?  CO 2  K1  (A/M 17)  2

3.  What are essential components of drip  a drip irrigation?  CO 2  K1  (A/M 17)  2

4.  Define t ank irrigation?  CO 2  K1  (N/D -2017)  2

5.  Expl ain Surface irrigation?  CO 2  K2  2

6.  What is  water distribution system?  CO 2  K1  2

7.  Define sprin kler irrigation?  CO 2  K1  (N/D -2017)  2

8. 

Define irrigation efficiency? 

CO 2  K1  2

9.  Explain ridge and furrow irrigation?  CO 2  K2  2

10.  Define  micro irrig ation?  CO 2  K1  (A/M -16)  2Part B  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allo tted 

11.  Explain about the irrigation methods also e xplain its merits and 

demerits ? CO 2  K2  ( N/D  –

2018 ) 

13

12.  What are the differen t methods of surface irrigation ? Describe 

the d ifferent ty pes of methods?  CO 2  K1  (A/M - 2017)  13

13.  Distinguish between surface, sub -surfa ce, micro irrigation 

methods?  CO 2  K4  13

14.  Explain the design o f Drip and sprinkler irrigation ? CO 2  K2  13

15.  Explain irrigation efficiency?  CO 2  K2  13

16.  Make a note on micro irrigation system and its merits  and 

demerits?  CO 2  K3 

( A/M -

2019)  13

17.  Define irrigat ion scheduling? ( N/D  – 2018 )  CO 2  K1 

( N/D  –

2018 )  13

18.  Explain tube well with neat  sket ch?  (A/M -2019)  CO 2  K2 

(A/M -2019)  13

UNIT  -III 

DIVE RSION AND IMPOUNDING STRUCTURES 

Part A  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allo tted 

1.  Explain types of impound ing structures?  CO  3 K2  (N/D 2018)  2

2.  What are the forces acting on gravity dam?  CO  3 K1  (N/D 2018)  2

3.  Classification of dams based on the m aterial s of construction?  CO  3 K2  (A/M 19)  2

4. 

What are the objectives of diversion headworks? 

CO  3 K1  (A/M 19)  2

5. 

Explain weirs? 

CO  3 K2  (A/M -16)  2

6.  Explain Barrages?  CO  3 K2  2

7. 

Define Earth dam? 

CO  3 K1  (A/M -16)  2

8. 

What is arch dam? 

CO 3 K1  2

Part B  CO  BT  Univ.QP  Marks level  Reference  Allo tted 

1.  What are the failures of gravity dam and write 

precautions ag ainst  failures?  CO  3 K1  (A/M -2019)  13 

2. 

Discuss about the components parts of diversion head 

works and also gives reason and rem edial measures of  its 

failures? 

CO 3  K6  (N/D - 2018)  13 

3.  What are the causes of failure of Earth dam, Gravity dam 

and Earth dam? State  its reme dies?  CO 3  K1   

> (N/D –
> 2016)

13 

4.  Identify the forces acting on  an earth dam ? CO 3  K3  (A/M - 2015  13 

5.  Identify  the forces acting on  a gravity dam.  CO 3  K3  (A/M - 2015)  13

6.  Explain th e design of gravity dams?  CO 3  K2  13

7.  What are the criteria for locating the di version head 

work? Explain?  CO 3  K1  13 

8.  Explain the factors affecting the  selection of type of a 

dam?  CO 3  K2  13 

UNIT -IV 

CANAL IRRIGATION 

Part A  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allo tted 

1.  Why canal drop is necessary in  canal irrigation?  CO 4  K1  (A/M 17)  2

2.  What is aqueduct? Where is it placed in a cros s drainage 

work?  CO 4  K1  (N/D 2018)  2

3.  What is the purpose of canal lining?  CO 4  K1  (A/M 17)  2

4.  State drawbacks in Kennedy’s theory? (N/D 2018)  CO 4  K1  (N/D 2018)  2

5.  Explain Lackey’ s Regime theory?  CO 4  K2  (A/M -16)  2

6.  What is cr oss drainage work?  CO 4  K1  (A/M -16)  2

7.  What is canal ou tlet?  CO 4  K1  2

8.  Define unlined canal?  CO 4  K1  2

9.  What is canal drop?  CO 4  K1  2

Part B  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allo tted 

1.  Explain canal  lining?  CO 4  K2  

> (april/may
> 2019)

13 2.  What are the different types of cross drainage works that 

necessary on canal alignment?  CO 4  K1  

> (nov/dec
> 2019)

13 

3.  Explain briefly and discuss the various methods of lining 

canals. give a cr oss section of lined canals?  CO 4  K2  

> (april/may
> 2017 )

13 

4. 

What are the purpose of cross drainage work ? what are 

the  various types of cross drainage works ? describe the 

use si phon in cross drainage work ? 

CO 4  K1  

> (april/may
> 2017)

13 

5.  what are cross drainage works expla in its type with neat 

sketch ?  CO 4  K1  

> (AUC
> Nov/Dec
> 2018 )

13 

6.  Compare Kennedy and lacy's theory  along with defects 

in  each type ?  CO 4  K2  

> (AUC
> Nov/Dec
> 2018 )

13 

7.  Explain the canal alignment ? (A/M - 2016) (K2)  CO 4  K2 

(A/M -

2016)  13 

8. 

Define Canal falls. Explain  its types briefly ? 

CO 4  K1  (A/M -17)  13 

UNIT  – V

WATER MANAGEMENT IN IRRIGATION 

Par t A  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allo tted 

1.  Why irrigation schedulin g is significant?  CO  5 K1  (A/M 17)  2

2.  What are the objectives of participatory irriga tion 

management?  CO  5 K1  (N/D 2018)  2

3.  What are the advantages of water  user association?  CO  5 K1  (A/M -16)  2

4.  Explain optimization of water use?  CO  5 K2  (A/M -16)  2

5.  Explain on form development works?  CO  5 K2  2

6.  Define Economic aspects of irrigation?  CO  5 K1  2

7.  Explain Changing paradigms in water management?  CO  5 K2  2

Part B  CO  BT 

level 

Univ.QP 

Reference 

Marks 

Allot ted 1.  List briefly about the Modernization techniques available 

in water management. ( april/may 2016) (K1)  CO  5 K1  

> ( april/may
> 2016)

13 

2.  What are the techniques availa ble to reduce water losses?  CO  5 K1  13 

3.  Explain about  on -farm -development works?  CO 5  K2  13 

4.  What is the need for  optimization of water use?  CO 5  K1  13 

5.  Explain detail in participatory irrigati on management?  CO 5  K2  

> ( april/may
> 2019)

13 

6.  Explain econo mic aspects of irrigati on?  CO 5  K2  13 

7.  Explain irrigation s cheduling ? (nov/dec 2017)  CO 5  K2  

> (nov/dec
> 2017)

13 

PREPARED BY, APPROVED BY, 

Mrs. R. B. RAKESH Mr. M. SHANMUHARAJAN 

(AP/CIVIL) (HOD/CIVIL )

