# CE8602 LP

Title: CE8602-LP.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LessonPlan/CE8602-LP.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 11:00:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
1 1 CO1 PO1-PO4 

2 2 CO1 PO1-PO4 

3 3 CO1 PO1-PO4 

4 2 CO1 PO1-PO4 

5 1 CO1 PO1-PO4 

## MOHAMED SATHAK A J COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING Chennai 603103 

Format no. 

Rev.Date 

Rev. No. 

TLP 07 

15/03/2022 

0LESSON PLAN - THEORY 

Department of Civil Engineering 

Name of the handling Faculty 

Year / Sem 

R.EMILREYAN 

Structural Analysis II 

CE8602 III / VI 

Subject Code 

Name of the Subject 

## Course Objective 

To learn the method of drawing influence lines and its uses in various applications like beams and plane trusses 

To analyse the arches, suspension bridges and space trusses and learn Plastic analysis of beams and rigid frames. 

> Blooms Level (L1-L6)
> Mode of Teaching (BB / PPT / NPTEL / MOOC / etc )

## UNIT I INFLUENCE LINES FOR DETERMINATE BEAMS 

> T / R*
> Book

influence lines for member forces in pin jointed plane frames. 

Topic(s) 

## Course Outcome 

Draw influence lines for statically determinate structures and calculate critical stress resultants 

Understand Muller Breslau principle and draw the influence lines for statically indeterminate beams. 

Analyse of three hinged, two hinged and fixed arches 

> CO

Suggested Activity: Case Study - Application of influence lines for finding maximum bending moment in determinate beams 

PO 

Lesson Plan 

Analyse the suspension bridges with stiffening girders 

Understand the concept of Plastic analysis and the method of analyzing beams and rigid frames. 

Sl. No. Periods Required 

Influence lines for reactions in statically determinate beams T2 BB L1 

Influence lines for shear force and bending moment T1 BB L2 

Calculation of critical stress resultants due to concentrated and distributed moving loads 

T1 NPTEL L3 

absolute maximum bending moment T1 BB L3 

T2 BB L5 

Evaluation method : Paper base evaluation 5 2 CO2 PO1-PO4    

> 62CO2

## PO1-PO4    

> 74CO2

## PO1-PO4    

> 81CO2

## PO1-PO4    

> 92CO3

## PO1-PO4    

> 10 5CO3

## PO1-PO4    

> 11 1CO3

## PO1-PO4    

> 12 1CO3

## PO1-PO4    

> 20 1CO4

## PO1-PO4    

> 21 4CO1

## PO1-PO4    

> 22 3CO4

## PO1-PO4    

> 23 1CO4

## PO1-PO4 

> Suggested Activity: Tutorial Problems on cables Problems on suspension bridges

Propped cantilever beams 

Muller Breslau’s principle– Influence line 

for Shearing force, Bending Moment and support reaction components 

## UNIT II INFLUENCE LINES FOR INDETERMINATE BEAMS 

## UNIT III ARCHES 

## UNIT IV CABLES AND SUSPENSION BRIDGES 

> Suggested Activity: Assignment -three hinged arch
> Evaluation method :Paper base evaluation

Equilibrium of cable and length of cable R2 PPT L3   

> T1 BB

L4 

Arches - Types of arches T1 PPT L3 

Analysis of three hinged, two hinged and fixed arches T1 BB  

> PPT

L2   

> Suggested Activity: Case Study - Application of influence lines for finding maximum bending moment in indeterminate beams
> Evaluation method :Paper base evaluation
> T1 BB

L4 

L3   

> T1 BB

L4 

Analysis of continuous beams, shear force and bending moment diagrams. T2 BB L4 

Fixed beam 

L4 

Parabolic and circular arches T2 BB 

Settlement and temperature effects R1 BB L4 

cables with three hinged stiffening girders T2 PPT L4 

anchorage of suspension cables R2 PPT L5 

Influence lines for three hinged stiffening girders T1 

> Evaluation method : Powerpoint presentation base evaluation

24 1 CO5 PO1-PO4 

25 3 CO5 PO1-PO4 

26 1 CO5 PO1-PO4 

27 1 CO5 PO1-PO4 

28 3 CO5 PO1-PO4 

1

2

121231L1 L2 L3 L4 L5 L6 LOT HOT Total 

Finite element method 

## Mapping syllabus with Bloom’s Taxonomy LOT and HOT 

Level 2 (L2) : Understanding 

Level 4 (L4) : Analysing 

Level 6 (L6) : Creating 

## Unit No 

Negi.L.S and Jangid R.S., Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishers, 2004. 

Plastic theory ,Statically indeterminate structures and Plastic moment of resistance 

T1 PPT L3 

Plastic analysis of indeterminate beams and frames. T1 PPT L4 

Reference Books 

Gambhir.M.L., Fundamentals of Structural Mechanics and Analysis, PHIL earning Pvt. Ltd.,2011. 

Level 3 (L3) : Applying 

## Unit Name 

Lower Order Thinking 

Fixed Hour Exams 

Level 5 (L5) : Evaluating 

Higher Order Thinking 

Projects / Mini Projects 

Reddy C.S., Basic Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co.Ltd.2002. 

http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/12/structural-analysis.html 

Website / URL References 

## UNIT-V PLASTIC ANALYSIS 

Plastic modulus ,Shape factor and Load factor T2 PPT L5 

Plastic hinge and mechanism ,collapse load ,Static and kinematic methods T1 PPT 

Text Books 

Bhavikatti,S.S, Structural Analysis,Vol.1 & 2, Vikas Publishing House Pvt.Ltd., NewDelhi-4, 2014. 

Punmia.B.C, Ashok Kumar Jain and Arun Kumar Jain, Theory of structures, Laxmi, Publications,2004. 

Suggested Activity:Tutorial Problems on shape factor Problems on solving indeterminate beams 

Evaluation method :Powerpoint presentation base evaluation 

Blooms Level 

Level 1 (L1) : Remembering 

Content Beyond the Syllabus Planned 

structural dynamics 

L5 

L5 

Upper and lower bound theorems T2 PPT 1 1 4 0 2 0 5 3 8

0 0 1 5 2 0 6 0 6

0 1 5 2 0 0 3 2 5

0 1 5 1 5 0 6 2 8

0 0 1 1 3 0 3 2 5

1 3 16 9 12 0 23 9 32 

3.125 9.375 50 28.125 37.5 0 71.875 28.125 100 

PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 PO11 PO12 PSO1 PSO2 

CO1 3 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

CO2 3 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

CO3 3 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

CO4 3 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

CO5 3 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

Avg 3 2 1.8 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

CO1 

CO2 

CO3 

CO4 

CO5 

*Kindly sign with date 

PO1 : Arches - Types of arches PO2 : Analysis of three hinged, two hinged and fixed arches . PO3 : Parabolic and circular arches .PO4 : Settlement and temperature effects. 

PO1 : Equilibrium of cable – length of cable - anchorage of suspension cables , PO2 : stiffening girders - cables with three hinged 

stiffening girders.PO4 : Influence lines for three hinged stiffening girders 

PO1 : Plastic theory - Statically indeterminate structures – Plastic moment of resistance . PO2 : Plastic modulus – Shape factor – Load factor PO3: development of solution,PO4:Plastic hinge and mechanism – collapse load - Static and kinematic methods – Upper and lower 

bound theorems - Plastic analysis of indeterminate beams and frames. 

Unit 5 PLASTIC ANALYSIS 

## Total 

## Total Percentage 

Format No :231 

Name & Sign of Faculty Incharge : Mr R Emilreyan 

Name & Sign of Subject Expert : Mr C Navaneetha Krishnan 

Head of the Department :

CO PO Mapping 

Justification for CO-PO mapping 

3 2 1High level Moderate level Low level 

PO1 : Influence lines for reactions in statically determinate beams , PO2 : Influence lines for shear force and bending moment,PO4 : Calculation of critical stress resultants due to concentrated and distributed moving loads . PSO1 absolute maximum bending moment -influence lines for member forces in pin jointed plane frames. 

PO1: Muller Breslau’s principle– Influence line for Shearing force, Bending Moment and support reaction components of propped 

cantilever, continuous beams (Redundancy restricted to one), and fixed beams. 

Unit 2 

## INFLUENCE LINES FOR INDETERMINATE BEAMS 

Unit 4 CABLES AND SUSPENSION BRIDGES 

Unit 3 ARCHES 

Unit 1 INFLUENCE LINES FOR DETERMINATE BEAMS

