# CE8603 LN

Title: CE8603-LN.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LectureNote/CE8603-LN.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 10:56:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
CE8603 IRRIGATION ENGINEERING UNIT -1 CROP WATER REQUIREMENT 

IRRIGATION DEFINITION: 

 Irrigation may be defined as the process of artificially supplying 

water to soil for raising crops. It is a science of planning and 

designing an efficient, low -cost, economic irrigation system to fit 

for natural conditions. 

 It is the engineering of controlling and harnessing the various 

natural sources of water, by construction of dams and reservoirs, 

canals and head works and finally distributing the water to 

agricultural fields. 

 Irrigation engineering includes the study and design of works in 

connection with river control, drainage of water -logged areas, 

and generation of hydroelectric power. 

NECESSITY 

 India is an agricultural country, and all its resources depend on 

the agricultural output. Water is the most vital element in the 

plant life. Water is naturally supplied to the plants by nature 

through rainfall. 

 Total rainfall in a particular area is insufficient or ill -timed. To get 

the maximum yi eld, it very essential to supply the optimum 

quantity of water, and correct timing of water. This is possible 

through a systematic irrigation system. 

SYSTEMATIC IRRIGATION SYSTEM 

It is the process of collecting water during the periods of excess 

rainfa ll and releasing it to the crops when it is needed. 

REASONS 

 Less rainfall – Total rainfall is less than for the crop, artificial 

supply is necessary. In this case irrigation works constructed 

where more water is available. EXAMPLE: Rajasthan canal – it co nveys water to arid zones of 

Rajasthan, where the annual rainfall hardly exceeds 100 to 

200mm. 

 Non -Uniform rainfall – Rainfall in particular area may not be 

uniform over the crop period. 

EXAMPLE: The early period crops rainfall will be available but at 

the end there will no rain fall and at last the plants may die 

altogether. During the early rainfall period we can collect the 

excess rainfall period and then the collected water is supplied to 

the crops during the no rainfall. 

 Growing a number of crops duri ng a year – Rainfall in particular 

area it can be sufficient to raise only one type of crops during the 

rainy seasons. 

EXAMPLE: Kharif crops – no irrigation may be required. 

Rabi crops – the provision of irrigation facilities in that 

area , crops can be raised in other season. 

 Growing perennial crops – Perennial crops such as sugar cane 

etc, this crop need water throughout the year, this can be 

achieved by provision of irrigation facilities in the area. 

 Commercial crops with Additional Wa ter – Rainfall in particular 

area may be sufficient to raise the usual crops, but more water is 

necessary for raising commercial and cash crops. 

 Controlled water supply – Construction of proper distribution 

system, the yield of ccrops may be increased bec ause of 

controlled supply water. IMPORTANCE OF IRRIGATION – STATED BY SHRI N.D. GULATI: 

“Irrigation in many countries is an old art – as old as civilization -

but for the whole world it is modern science – the science of 

survival”. 

ADVANTAGES OF MODERN METHODS: 

 Supply the moisture essential for the plant growth. 

 Save the crops from drying during short duration droughts 

 Cools the soil and atmosphere 

 Make more favourable environment for plant growth 

 Dilutes salts in the soil. 

 Reduces the hazard of soil piping. 

 Softens the tillage pans. 

SCOPE OF IRRIGACE SCIENCE: 

 It deals with all aspects and problems extending from the 

watershed to the agricultural farms. 

 It deals with the design and construction of all works, such as 

dams, weirs, head regulators etc. 

KN OWLEDGE OF IRRIGATION ENGINEER: 

An irrigation engineer must have the required knowledge of 

cultivation of various crops, their maturing and protection from pests. 

CLASSIFICATION: 

(A) Engineer Aspect: 

 Storage or lifting of water is the first phase of irr igation 

engineering. By the construction of a dam across the river, a

suitable reservoir can be created and water can be stored. Water 

can be lifted and fed to small channels or pipes. 

 Conveyance of water to agricultural fields that is stored water 

can be distributed through some distribution of system. This is the second phase includes the design and construction of 

suitable canal system, along with various regulatory works such 

as head regulators, cross regulators, fall, etc. for the efficient 

work workin g of the canal. 

 The water is applied to the crop by flooding, furrows, 

corrugations, subsoil irrigation or by sprinkling. 

 Drainage and relieving water -logging is the proper disposition of 

excess water by suitable drainage methods is very important. 

The des ign of surface and sub -surface drainage system is of vital 

importance in maintaining the high productivity of irrigated 

lands. 

 Development of water power associated with the irrigation 

projects with the generation of hydroelectric power at dam site 

or canal falls. 

FLOW PROCESS 

STORAGE, DIVERSION, OR LIFTING OF WATER 

DEVELOPMENT OF WATER POWER 

APPLICATION OF WATER TO AGRICULTURAL FIELDS 

DRAINAGE AND RELIEVINIG WATER 

LOGGING 

CONVEYANCE OF WATER TO THE AGRICULTURAL FILEDS (B) AGRICULTURAL ASPECT 

 Proper depths of water necessary in single application of water 

for various crops. 

 Distribution of water uniformly and periodically. 

 Capacities of different soil for irrigation of water and flow of 

water in soils. 

 Reclamation of waste and alkaline lands, where this can be 

carried out through the agency of water. 

BENEFITS OF IRRIGATION: 

All irrigation schemes are designed that they incr ease the food 

production of the country. 

 Increase in food production 

 Protection from famine 

 cultivation of cash crops 

 elimination of mixed cropping 

 addition to the wealth of the country 

 increase in prosperity of people 

 Generation of hydro -electric power 

 domestic and industrial water supply 

 inland navigation 

 canal plantations 

 improvements in the ground water storage 

 aid in civilization 

 general development of the country 

ILL -EFFECTS OF IRRIGATION: 

Excess irrigation and unscientific use of irrigation may gi ve rise to ill -

effects they are: 

 Breeding places of mosquitoes: caused by leakage of water, 

ponds and depressions get filled up with water and create breeding places for mosquitoes. Then if canal is leaky, 

mosquitoes breed all along the canal and spread malarial 

conditions. 

 Water -logging: water table is near the ground surface, over 

irrigation my raise the water table. This saturates the crop root -

zone completely, causes efflorescenc e and the whole area 

become water logged. 

 Damp climate: The areas which are already damp and cold, 

become damper and colder due to irrigation. 

TYPES OF IRRIGATION: 

Irrigation can be classified into two types they are: 

(A) Flow Irrigation (B ) Lift Irri gation 

FLOW CHART: 

IRRIGATION 

FLOW IRRIGATION  LIFT IRRIGATION 

DIRECT 

IRRIGATION 

STORAGE 

IRRIGATION 

INUNDATION 

IRRIGATION 

PERENNIAL 

IRRIGATION 

COMBINED 

STORAGE FLOW IRRIGATION 

It is the type of irrigation in which supply of water available is at 

such a level that it is conveyed on to the land by the gravity flow. 

Flow irrigation is further classified into two divisions they are: 

(A) Perennial irrigation system (B) Inund ation or flood irrigation 

system 

(A) PERENNIAL IRRIGATION: 

 The water required for irrigation is supplied in accordance with 

the crop requirements throughout the crop period. 

 For such a system some storage heads works, such as dams and 

storage weirs or bar rages are required to store the excess water 

during floods and release it to the crops and when it is required. 

(B) INUNDATION IRRIGATION: 

 It is carried out by deep flooding and thorough saturation of the 

land to be cultivated which is then drained off prior to the 

planting of the crop. 

Depending on the source of water is drawn flow irrigation can be 

further subdivided into three types: 

 Direct irrigation(River canal irrigation): Diversion scheme 

 Storage irrigation(Reservoir or tank irrigation): Storage s cheme 

 Combin ed storage and diversion scheme 

(1) DIRECT IRRIGATION: 

 Water is directly diverted to the canal without attempting to 

store the water. For such a system a low diversion weir or 

diversion barrage is constructed across the river. This raises the 

water level in the river and thus diverts the water to the canal 

taking off upstream of the weir.  Generally a direct irrigation scheme is of a smaller magnitude, 

since there are no rigid controls over the supplies. One or two 

main canals may take off dir ectly from the river. 

 Cross -drainage works are constructed wherever natural drains or 

distributary streams cross the canals. In a bigger scheme, there 

may be branch canal taking of from the main canal. 

(2) STORAGE IRRIGATION OR TANK IRRIGATION: 

 In stora ge irrigation system, a solid barrier, such as a dam or a 

storage weir is constructed across the river and water is stored 

in the reservoir or lake so formed. 

 Depending upon the water requirements of cr ops, or 

hydroelectric power gene ration, and upon the f low of water in 

the river, the volume of storage required is decided. From the 

contour plan of the basin at the site of construction, the 

elevation storage curve for the reservoir is known. 

 The height of the dam is then decided from this curve, 

correspon ding to the storage -volume required. In India, most of 

the irrigation schemes fall under this category. 

(3) COMBINED SYSTEM 

 We have seen that in the storage irrigation system, water is 

stored in the reservoir, since the river is not perennial, while in 

the direct irrigation system, the river is perennial and hence the 

water is diverted from the river to the canal. 

 Sometimes, a combined scheme is adopted in which the water is 

first stored in the reservoir formed at the upstream side of the 

dam, and this water is used for the water power generation. 

 The discharge from the power house is fed back into the river, to 

the downstream side of the dam. Thus, sufficient quantity of 

flow is again available in the river.  At a suitable location in the downstream, a pick -up weir is 

constructed. This weir diverts the water from the river to the 

canal. 

 One typical example of such a scheme is the Kota dam and Kota 

barrage on Chambal river in Rajasthan. 

(B) LIFT IRRIGATION: 

 Lift irrigation is practiced when the water -supply is too low level 

to run by gravitation onto the land. In such a circumstances 

water is lifted up by mechanical means. 

 Irrigation from wells is an example of lift irrigation, in which sub -

soil water is l ifted up to the surface and is then conveyed to the 

agricultural fields. UNIT -2 IRRIGATION METHODS 

TANK IRRIGATION: 

Tank irrigation may be defined as the storage irrigation scheme, which 

utilizes the water stored on the upstream side of a smaller earth dam, 

called bund. These bund reservoirs are called as tanks, specifically iin 

South India. 

There is no technical differ ence between a ‘reservoir’ and a ‘tank’ 

except that a large -sized tank will be termed as a reservoir. Reservoir 

will generally formed by dams of any material such as masonry dam, 

concrete dam, or earth dam. 

A tank is generally formed by earth dams only and these earthen 

bunds, spanning across the streams, are called tank bunds or tank 

banks. 

DEPTH OF TANKS: 

Tanks of south India possess a maximum depth of 4.5m and few as 

deep as 7.5 to 9m and only few exceptional ones exceed 11m in depth. 

When the depth of t he tank exceeds 12m or so, the tank is generally 

referred as reservoir. 

DEFINITION: 

Tank irrigation can be defined as a miniature version of large dam. 

Water is impounded behind an earthen embankment to be released 

through sluices into canals be further di stributed to irrigation lands. 

ADVANTAGES OF TANK IRRIGATION: 

 Appropriate irrigation devices in the cultivation of paddy. 

 Flood control device 

 Insurance against low rainfall periods and also recharged ground 

water  Device to protect the ecosystem. 

TANK DESI GN: 

A tank with the least length for the maximum depth of the 

embankment would provide maximum storage per unit length would 

cause least submergence and most economical 

Generally tanks are prepared for paddy cultivation and shapes, length 

of embankment det ermine the cost of construction of a tank. 

During British period some tanks were constructed but they were 

constructed for drinking purpose or leisure spot and tanks were also 

constructed based on t he requirements of farmers. Based on water 

availability and rainfall pattern. 

LEARNING: 

Traditional technique - some cases are as good as modern technique 

and modify traditional technique to suit local situation. Then need to 

preserve traditional technique s. 

WELL IRRIGATION: 

A well is a small hole dug in the ground from which sub -soil water is 

taken out for irrigation. An ordinary well is about 3to 5 metres deep, 

but can reach up to a depth of 15 metres. This well irrigation is widely 

practiced in those are as where sufficient sweet ground water is 

available. 

CLASSIFICATION: 

Wells are classified into two types: 

 Open wells (Dug wells) 

 Tube wells OPEN WELL: 

Open wells which have comparatively large diameters and lower 

discharges. Usually they have discharge of 20 m3/hr but if constructed 

by efficient planning it gives discharge of 200 -300 m3/hr. They are 

constructed of diameter of about 1 -10m and have depth of about 2 -

20m. They are constructed by digging therefore they are also known 

as dug wells. 

CL ASSIFICATIO N OF OPEN WELL BASED ON DEPTH: 

SHALLOW OPEN WELL: 

These are the wells resting on the water bearing strata and gets their 

supplies from the surrounding materials. 

DEEP OPEN WELL: 

These are the wells resting on the impervious layer known and Mota 

layer and g ets their supply from this layer. 

CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TYPE OF WALL: 

KACHHA WELLS: These type s of wells are only constructed when 

water table is high as these high as these type of wells sometimes 

collapses. 

WELLS WITH IMPREVIOUS LINING: These are most suitable and stable 

type of open well. These are constructed by first digging a pit then a 

curb which is a circular ring with sharp bottom is inserted . Then a 

masonry wall up to some distance above ground is constructed, then 

as excavation proceeds it sink s blow and then masonry is further 

extended and well is constructed. As water enters from the bottom 

type of flow is potential. 

WELL WITH PERVIOUS LINING: These type s of wells are suitable in coarse formations these are 

constructed by masonry of dry bricks or stones without any binding 

materials. So the water supply enters from the wall of well therefore 

the flow is radial. Such wells are provided with bottom plug on the 

flow is not combination of radial and spherical. 

TUBE WELLS: 

A tube well is a long pipe sunk is ground intercepting one or more 

water bearing strata. As compared to open well there diameter is less 

about 80 -600mm. 

CLASSIFICATION BASED ON DEPTH: 

SHALLOW TUBE WELL: These are the tube which has depth limited to 

30 meters a nd maximum have discha rge of 20 m3/hour. 

DEEP TUBE WELL: These are the tube wells which have maximum 

depth of about 600m and may give discharge more then 800 m3/hour. 

CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPPLY SYSTEM: 

STRAINER TYPE TUBE WELL: 

These are most commonly used tube such that in ge neral a tube well 

means strainer tube well. In this type well a strainer which a wire 

mesh with small openings is wrapped around the main pipe which also 

has large openings such that area of opening in strainer and main pipe 

remains same. Annual space is l eft between two strainer so that the 

open area of pipe perforation is not reduced. The type of flow is radial. 

CAVITY TUBE WELL: 

A cavity tube well consists of pipe sunk in ground up to the hard clay 

layer. It draws water from the bottom of well. In initia l stages fine 

sand is also pumped with water and in such manner a cavity is formed 

at the bottom so the water enters from the aquifer into the well 

through this cavity. IRRIGATION METHODS: 

Irrigation water may be applied to the crops by three basic metho ds: 

(a) SURFACE IRRIGATION: Just flooding water – about 90% of the 

irrigated areas in the world are by this method. 

(b) SPRINKLER IRRIGATION: A pplying water under pressure - about 5% 

of the irrigated areas by this method. 

(c) SUB -SURFACE IRRIGATION: Floodi ng water underground and 

allowing it to come up by capillarity to crops roots. 

CHOICE OF IRRIGATION METHODS: 

The following criteria should be considered: 

 Water supply available 

 Topography of area to be irrigated 

 Climate of the area 

 Soils of the area 

 crops to be grown 

 economics 

 Local traditions and skills 

INFORMATION TO BE COLLECTED ON VISIT A PROPOSED IRRIGATION 

SITE: 

(A) SOIL PROPERTIES: 

Texture and structure, moisture equilibrium points, water holding 

capacity, agricultural potential, land classification , kinds of crops that 

the soil can support. 

(B) WATER SOURCE: 

Water source availability e.g. surface water, boreholes etc, hydrologic 

data of the area, water quantity, water quality, e.g. sodium adsorption ratio, salt content, boron, etc; possible engineer ing works necessary 

to obtain water. 

(C) WEATHER DATA: 

Temperature, relative humidity, sunshine hours and rainfall. 

(D) TOPOGRAPHY E.G. SLOPE: 

This helps to determine the layout of the irrigation system and method 

of irrigation water application suited for the area. 

(E) HISTORY OF PEOPLE AND IRRIGATION IN THE AREA: 

Check past exposure of the people to irrigation and land tenure and 

level of possible re -settlement. 

(F) INFORMATION ABOUT CROPS GROWN IN THE AREA: 

Check preference by people, market potential, adaptability to area, 

water demand, growth schedules and planting periods. 

SURFACE IRRIGATION METHODS: 

Their main classification of surface methods is as follows: 

 Free flooding 

 border flooding 

 check flooding 

 basin flooding 

 furrow irrigation 

 drip irrigation (1) FREE FLOODING: 

Free flooding can be defined as ditches are excavated in the field 

either on the contour or up and down the sl ope. It is also called wild 

flooding, since no attempt is made to control the flow by means of 

levees, etc. 

CHARACTERISTICS :

 Land preparation cost is low 

 Labour requirements are usually high 

 Water application efficiency is also low. 

 Most suitable for close growing crops, pastures, etc, particularly 

where the land is steep. 

 Spacing between contour ditches/laterals/subsidiary ditches is 

kept 20 to 50 m. 

(2) BORDER FLOODING OR BORDER STRIP METHOD: 

In this method, the land is divided into a number of strips, separated 

by low levees called borders. Strip size: 10 to 20m wide, and 100 to 

400m long. 

To prevent water from concentrating on either side of the border, the 

land should be leveled perpendicular to the flow. Water is made to flow 

from the supply ditch into each strip. The water flows slowly towards 

the lower end, and infiltrates into the soil as it advances. 

When the advancing water reaches the lower end of the strip, the 

supply of water to the strip is turned off. The supply ditch also called 

irrigation stream may either be in the form of an earthen channel or an 

underground concrete pipe ha ving risers at in tervals. 

The size of the suppl y ditch depends upon the infilt ration rate of the 

soil, and the width of the border strip. Coarse textured soils with high 

infiltration rates will require high discharge rate and therefore larger 

supply ditch , in order to spread water over the entire strip rapidly and to avoid excessive losses due to deep percolation at the upper 

reaches. 

On the other hand, fine textured soils with low infiltration rates, 

require smaller ditches to avoid excessive losses due to run off at the 

lower reaches. 

A relationship between the discharge through the supply ditch (Q), the 

average depth of water flowing over the strip(Y), the rate of infiltration 

of the soil(f), the area of the land irrigated(A), and approximate time 

requ ired to cover the given area with water (t) is given by the 

equation: 

𝒕 = 𝟐 . 𝟑 𝒚 

𝒇 𝒍𝒐𝒈𝟏𝟎 ( 𝑸 

𝑸 − 𝒇𝑨 )

where, 

Q= Discharge through the supply ditch 

f= Rate of infiltration of soil 

y= Depth of water flowing over the border strip 

A= Area of land strip to be irrigated 

t= Time required to cover the given area A. 

(3) CHECK FLOODING: 

Check flooding is similar to ordinary flooding except that the water is 

controlled by surrounding the check area with low and flat levees. 

Levees are generally constructed along the contours, having vertical 

interval of about 5 to 10 cm. These levees are connected with cross -

levees at convenient places. In check flooding the check is filled with 

water at a fairly high rate and allowed to stand until the water 

infiltrates. This method is suitable for more permeable soils as well as for less 

permeable soils. The water can be quickly spread in case of high 

permeable soils, this reducing the percolation losses. 

The water can also be held on the surface for a longer time in case of 

less per meable soils, for assuring adequate penetration. These 

checks, are sometimes used to absorb water, where the stream -flow is 

diverted during the periods of high run off. 

(4) BASIN FLOODING: 

This method is a special type of check flooding and is adopted 

spec ially for orchard trees. One or more trees are generally placed in 

the basin, and the surface is flooded as in check method, by ditch 

water. 

(5) FURROW IRRIGATION METHOD: 

In flooding methods water covers the entire surface, while in furrow 

irrigation metho d only one -fifth to one -half of the land surface is 

wetted by water. 

It therefore, results in less evaporation, less pudding of soil and 

permits cultivation sooner after irrigation. Furrows are narrow fields 

ditches, excavated between rows of plants and ca rry irrigation water 

through them. 

Spacing of furrows is determined by the proper spacing of the plants. 

Furrows vary from 8 to 30 cm deep and may be as much as 400m long. 

Excessive long furrows may result in too much percolation near the 

upper end, and to o little water near the down -slope end. Deep furrows 

are widely used for row crops. 

Small shallow furrows called corrugations are particularly suitable for 

relatively irregular topography and close growing crops, such as 

meadows and small grains. Water may be diverted into the furrows by an opening in the bank of 

the supply ditch or preferably by using a rubber hose tubing, which can 

be primed by immersion in the ditch. 

The use of hose, prevents the necessity of breaking the ditch bank, 

and provides a unifo rm flow into the furrow. 

(6) DRIP IRRIGATION METHOD: 

Drip irrigation, also called trickle irrigation, is the latest field irrigation 

technique and is meant for adoption at places where there exists 

acute scarcity of irrigation water and other salt problems .

In this method, water is slowly and directly applied to the root zone of 

the plants, there by minimizing the losses by evaporation and 

percolation. 

Drip irrigation was first introduced in Israel, but practiced in many 

countries of the world. Along with the irrigation water, nutrients are 

also fed to the system. 

Water is first filtered so that the impurities may not clog the fine holes 

of the drippers. The whole arrangement consists of the following 

components: 

 a pump to lift wat er 

 a head tank to store the water and to maintain a pressure head 

of 5 to 7m. 

 central distribution system which filters the water, adds 

nutrients and regulates the pressure and amount of water to be 

applied. 

 mains and secondary line made of polyethylene, polyvinyl 

chloride or alkathyelene material. The diameter of the piping may 

vary from 20mm to 40mm. A water meter may be fixed to the 

beginning of the mains . Trickle lines consisting of 10 to 20mm dia. PVC pipes with 

perforations at a distance equal to the spacing of the crops. The 

trickle lines are fitted to the secondary lines at a distance equal 

to the row spacing of the crops, which may vary between 60cm 

to 90cm for most of the crops. 

 Plastic nozzles having perforations attached to the trickle line. 

The perforations are so designed that water leaves the nozzles at 

a very slow rate, usually ranging between 2 to 10 liters per hour, 

depending upon the irrigation requirements of the crops. It is 

also suitable to all climatic conditions and to all types of soi ls. 

However it is most suited coarse sandy formations. 

ADVANTAGES OF DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM: 

 Less requirement of irrigation water. 

 water supply at optimum level 

 water logging avoided 

 High yield and cultivation of cash crops 

 No over -irrigation and variation in application rate 

 Weed control and increase in net irrigable area. 

 Nutrients preservation and effective pest control 

 Reduce labour cost and no soil erosion 

 Suitablility for saline soils and maintenance of high surface 

temperature 

 Suitable for any topogr aphy 

DISADVANTAGES PF DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM: 

 High initial cost 

 Danger of blockade of nozzles 

 change in spacing nozzle SPRINKLER IRRIGATION METHOD: 

 In this farm -water application method, water is applied to the soil 

in the form of a spray through a netwo rk of pipes and pumps. It is 

a kind of an artificial rain and therefore, gives very good results. 

 It is costly process and widely used in U.S.A. and it can be used 

for all types of soils, different topographies and slopes. 

 It can advantageously be used for many crops, because it fulfills 

the normal requirement of uniform distribution of water. This 

method possesses great potentialities for irrigating the areas, 

where other types of surface or sub -surface irrigation are very 

difficult. 

 Despite numerous advan tages, this method has not become 

popular in Pakistan for the simple reason of cost and a lot of 

technical requirements. The correct design and efficient 

operation are very important for the success of this method. 

 Special steps have to be taken for preven ting entry of slit and 

debris, which are very harmful for the sprinkler equipment. 

 Debris -choke nozzle , interfere with the application of water on 

the land, while the abrasive action of slit causes excessive wear 

on pump impellers, sprinkler nozzles and be arings. 

 The system is to be designed in such a way that the entire 

sprayed water seeps into the soil, and there is no run off from the 

irrigated area. 

 In sprinkler irrigation network, we have the mains and the sub -

mains though which water under pressure is made of low. 

Revolving sprinkler heads are then usually mounted on rising 

pipes attached to the laterals. 

 The water jets come out through the revolving sprinkler heads, 

with force. When the sprinkler head are not provided perforations 

are made in then pip es and they are provided with nozzles, 

through which water jets out and falls on the ground.  Generally such a perforated pipe system operates low heads, 

whereas the revolving head sprinklers operate on high as well as 

low heads, depending upon the type of rotary head used. 

ADVANTAGES OF SPRINKLER IRRIGATION: 

 Erosion can be controlled. 

 Uniform application for water is possible 

 Land preparation is not required. 

 Small streams of irrigation water can be used efficiently. 

 Crop damage from frost can be reduced. 

 It is a stand -by drainage pumping plant. 

LIMITATIONS: 

 Wind may distort sprinkling pattern. 

 A constant water supply is needed for commercial use of 

equipment. 

 Water must be clean and free from sand. 

 The power requirement is high 

IRRIGATION SCHEDULING CRITERI A: 

(a) SOIL WATER REGIME 

 Feel and appearance 

 Depletion of available soil moisture 

 Soil moisture tension 

(b) CLIMATOLOGICAL 

 Cumulative pan evaporation 

 IW/CPE ratio 

(c) Plant indices 

 Visual symptoms and plant population 

 Growth rate and plant water potential UNIT -3 DIVERSION AND IMPOUNDING STRUCTURES 

DAMS: 

A dam is a hydraulic structure of fairly impervious material built across 

a river to create a reservoir on its upstream side for impounding water 

for various purposes. These purposes may be irrigation hydro -power, 

water supply, flood control, navigation, f ishing and recreations. 

BASED ON FUCTIONS OF DAMS - CLASSIFICATION: 

(1) STORAGE DAMS: 

They are constructed to store water during the rainy season when 

there is a large flow in the river. Many small dams impound the spring 

runoff for later use in dry summer s. Storage dams may also provide a 

water supply, improved habitat for fish and wildlife. 

They may store water for hydroelectric power generation, irrigation or 

for a flood control project. Storage dams are the most common type of 

dams and in general the d am means a storage dam. 

(2) DIVERSION DAMS: 

A diversion dam is constructed for th purpose of diverting water of the 

river into an off taking canal. They provide sufficient pressure for 

pushing water into ditches, canals, or othery conveyance systems. 

Such shorter dams are used for irrigation and for diversion from a

stream to a distant storage reservoir. 

It is usually of low height and has a small storage reservoir on its 

upstream. The diversion dam is a sort of storage weir which also 

diverts water and has a small storage. 

(3) DETENTION DAMS: 

Detention dams are constructed for flood control. A de tention dam 

retards the flow in the river on its downstream during floods by storin gsome flood water . Thus the effect of sudden flo ods is reduced to s ome 

extent. T he water retained in the reservoir is later released gradually 

at a controlled rate acco rding to the c rying capacity of the channel 

downstream of the detention dam. Thus the area downstream of the 

dam is protected against flood. 

(4) DEBRIS DAMS: 

A debris d am is constructed to retain debris such as sand, gravel and 

drift wood flowing in the river with water. The water after passing over 

a debris dam relatively clear. 

(5) COFFER DAMS: 

It is an enclosure constructed around the construction site to exclude 

wate r so that the construction can be done in dry. A coffer dam is thus 

temporary dam constructed for facilitating construction. 

BASED ON STRUCTURE AND DESIGN DAMS CAN BE CLASSIFIED AS 

FOLLOWS: 

(1) GRAVITY DAMS: 

A gravity dam is a massive sized dam fabricated from concrete or 

stone masonry. They are designed to hold back large volume of water. 

By using concrete, the weight of the dam is actually able to resist the 

horizontal thrust of water pushing against it. This is why it is called a 

gravity dam. Gravity is essentially hold sthe dam down to the ground. 

Stopping water from toppling it over. 

Gravity dams are well suited for blocking rivers ini wide valleys or 

narrow gorge ways. Since gravity dams must rely on their own weight 

to hold back water . It is necessary that they are built on a solid 

foundation of bedrock. 

EXAMPLES: GRAND COULEE DAM (U.S.A.), Nagarjuna Sagar (INDIA) AND Itaipu 

dam. 

FORCES ACTING ON A GRAVITY DAM: 

 Water pressure 

 Weight of dam 

 uplift pressure 

 ice pressure 

 Slit pressure 

 Wave pressure and wind pressure. 

DESIGN OF THE EARTH DAMS: 

Earthen dams have been constructed from long past. They are 

constructed with the natural materials. The construction of earthen 

dam, upto 1930, was based mostly on experience. But now with the 

adva nce knowledge soil mechanics, these dams are designed and 

constructed on scientific basis. With the increased knowledge the 

behavior of soils and the development of earth moving machinery 

earth dams can be constructed economically even up to the height o 

250m to 300 m. 

MATERIALS OF EARTHEN DAMS: 

Earthen dam require very large quantity of materials. It is necessary to 

utilize the soils available in large quantities near the site. In general 

earth dams can be designed to fulfill its unction satisfactorily wi th any 

type of material available. 

The following materials are commonly used: 

 Clayey material 

 Black cotton soil, silty clayey loam, for heating and cutoff. 

 Sandy material 

 Murum, soft rock, sandy silt, for casting rock 

 For pitching and riprap, rock masonry, etc.  Sand and filters, seepage drain and masonry 

 Cement, steel, lime, and other building materials in small 

quantities fo r the construction of spillway, outlets, etc. 

TYPES OF EARTHEN DAMS: 

Depending upon the mode of construction earthen dams are classifi ed 

as 

 Homogeneous Type 

 Zone Type 

ARCH DAMS: 

An arch dam is a solid dam made of concrete that is curved upstream 

in plan. The arch dam is designed so that the force of the water 

against it, known as hydrostatic pressure, presses against the arch, 

compressing and strengthening the structure as it pushes into its 

foundation or abutments. 

An arch dam is most suitable for narrow gorges or canyons with steep 

walls of stable rocks to support the other dam types, they require 

much less construction materi al, making them economical and 

practical in remote areas. 

CLASSIFICATION: 

In general arch dams are classified based on the ratio of the base 

thickness of the structural height as thin for breath or height less than 

0.2. Medium -thick for b/h between 0.2 and 0.3 and thick for b/h ratio 

over 0.3 

Arch dams classified with respect to their structural height are: 

 Low dams up to 100 feet 

 Medium high dams between 100 -300 feet 

 High dams are above 300 feet. LOADS: 

The main loads for which an arch dam is designed are: 

 Dead load 

 Hydrostatic load generated by the reservoir and the tail water 

 Tempera ture load 

 Earthquake load 

DIVERSION OF HEAD WORKS: 

An hydraulic structure which supplies water to the off -taking canal is 

called a head work. 

CLASSIFICAION: 

Head work may be d ivided into two 

(a) Storage head work 

(b) Diversion head work 

(a) STORAGE HEAD WORK: 

Dam is constructed across a river valley to form storage reservoir, 

known as s torage head works. Water is supplied to the canal from this 

reservoir through canal regulator .

(b) Diversion head work 

Weir or barrage is constructed across a perennial river to raise water 

level and to divert he water o canal, is known as diversion head work. 

Flow of water in the canal is controlled by canal head regulator. UNIT -4 CANAL IRRIGATION 

CANALS: 

A canal is an artificial channel, generally trapezoidal in shape 

constructed on the ground to carry water to the fields either from the 

river or from a tank or reservoir. 

CLASSIFICATION based on the nature of source of supply: 

 Permanent canal 

 Inundation canal 

CLASSIFICATION based on financial output: 

 Productive canal 

 Protective canal 

CLASSIFICATION based on function of the canal: 

 Irrigation canal 

 Feeder canal 

 Power canal 

 Carrier canal 

 Navigation canal 

CANAL REGULATION AND CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS 

The available natural ground slope is steep than the designed bed 

slope of the channel, the difference is adjusted by constructing 

vertical “falls” or drops in the canal bed at suitable intervals. Such 

drop in a natural canal bed will not be stable a nd therefore a masonry 

structure is constructed. Such structure call ed a canal drop. 

TYPES OF CANAL FALL: 

Depending on the ground level conditions and shape of the fall the 

various types of fall are: OGEE FALL: 

The Ogee fall was constructed by Sir Proby Ca ultey on the Ganga 

canal. This type of fall has gradual convex and concave surfaces they 

are in the ogee form. 

STEPPED FALL: 

It consists of a series of vertical drops in the form of steps. The steps 

is suitable in places where sloping ground is very long and require a 

long glacis to connect the higher bed level with lower bed level. 

CANAL ESCAPE: 

It is a side channel constructed to remove surplus water from an 

irrigation channel into a natural drain. The water in the irrigation 

channel may become surplus d ue to mistakes, excessive rainfall in the 

upper reaches and difficulties in regulation at the head. 

CANAL DRAINAGE WORKS: 

Irrigation canals carrying water from head works to crop field, have to 

cross few natural drainage streams, to cross those drainage safely by 

the canals, some suitable struct ures are required to construct 

drainage called Cross Drainage Works (CDWs). 

TYPES OF CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS: 

Type 1 – irrigation canal passes over the drainage 

 Aqueduct 

 Siphon Aqueduct 

Type 2 – Drainage passes over t he irrigation canal 

 Super passage 

 Siphon super passage Type – 3 Drainage and canal intersection each other of the same level \

 Level crossing 

 Inlet and outlet 

SELECTION OF TYPES OF CROSS DRAINAGE WORK 

 Relative bed levels 

 Availability of suitable foundatio n

 Economical consideration 

 Discharge of the drainage 

 Construction problems 

CANAL INLET AND OUTLET: 

When irrigation canal meets a small stream or drain at same level, 

drain is allowed to enter the canal as inlet. At some distances from 

this inlet point a part of water is allowed to drain as outlet which 

eventually meets the original stream. Some pitching is required at the 

inlet and outlet. The bed and banks between the inlet and outlet are 

also protected by stone pitching. This type of CDW is called inlet and 

outlet. 

CANAL ALIGNMENT: 

A canal has to be aligned in such a way that it covers the entire area 

proposed to be irrigated, with shortest possible length and at the same 

time it cost including cost of drainage works is a minimum. 

TYPES OF CANAL ALIGNMEN T: 

 Ridge/watershed canal 

 Contour canal 

 Side slope canal NECESSIY OF CANAL LINING: 

 Maximum velocity limited to prevent erosion 

 Seepage of water into the ground and possibility of vegetation 

growth in banks, leading to increased friction 

 Possibility of bank failure ei ther due to activities of burrowing 

animals 

 To avoid water logging 

 To avoid movement of contaminated group. 

KENNEDY THEORY: 

RG Kennedy an executive engineer of Punjab PWD carried out 

extensive investigations on some of the canal reaches in the upper 

Bari Doab canal system he selected some straight reaches of the 

canal section which had not posed any silting and scouring problems 

during the previous 30 years. 

From the observation he concluded that the slit supporting power in a 

channel cross sect ion was mainly dependent upon the generation of 

the eddies rising to the surface. The eddies are generated due to the 

friction of the following water with the channel surface the vertical 

component of these eddies try to move the sediment up while weight 

of the sediment tries to bring it down. If the well is sufficient to 

generate eddies as keep the sediment just in suspension silting will be 

avoided based on this concept he defined critical velocity. 

According to K ennedy the critical velocity ratio Vc in a channel may 

be defined as the mean velocity of flow which will just keep the 

channel free from silting or scouring. 

Vc =0.55.m.d 0.64 

m= critical velocity LACEY REGIME THEORY: 

Lacey an eminent engineer of up irrigation department carried out 

extensive investigations on the design of stable channel in Alluviums 

on the basics of his research work. He found many drawbacks in 

Kennedy theory and he put forward its new theory. He differentiated 

between three regime conditions. 

 True regime 

 Initial regime 

 Final regime 

A channel will be in true regime if these conditions are satisfied: 

 Discharge is constant 

 Flow is uniform 

 Slit charge is constant 

 Slit grade is constant 

Lacey’s theory: 

Slit factor = f = 1.76 √𝒎 

where, 

m = mean particle size, mm UNIT -5 WATER MANAGEMENT IN IRRIGATION 

INTRODUCTION 

The role of irrigation in India in expanding crop production and food f 

production will become increasingly over 55% of agricultural output 

from irrigated lands and production from rainfed areas is faced with 

lack of land for expansion and the prevailing risk of drought. 

IRRIGATION IN INDIA: 

The total geographical area of land in India is 329 m.ha. which is 

2.45% of the globe land area. India has 16% of the world population as 

compared to o nly 4% of average annual runoff in the rivers. 

IRRIGATION IN PLANNING COMMSION: 

Irrigation was given the first priority in first second and third five year 

plans. Share of irrigation in the expenditure was more than 25% during 

sixth, seventh and eight fiv e year plans. 

During these plans, the irrigated area is increased in 2.4 million ha per 

year. The maximum potential is estimated around 140 million ha which 

is the target for achievement by the year 2025. 

METHODS: 

 Sprinkler irrigation system 

 Drip irrigatio n system 

 Tank modernization 

 Farmer participation 

 Re -use of waste water 

 Inter -basin transfers 

SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEM: This system prevent the seepage losses and to have controlled 

irrigation. Many seed farms and nurseries are being successfully 

raised under this system. 30 -40% water is saved under this system. 

DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM: 

In India wells nearly contribute to 30% of the total irrigated area in the 

country. In many states the ground water table is fast depleting. AS a 

result many wells have become dry and abandoned. Drip irrigation 

system is becoming popular in Madhya Pradesh and Maharastra. 

Banana, grapes, vegetables, and sugar cane, etc are being 

successfully grown. 40 -70% of water is saved and crop yield is 

increased from 10 -100%. 

PATICIPAT ORY IRRIGATION MANAGEMENT: 

Participation of irrigation users in the management of the irrigation 

system, at all levels and in all aspects of management. 

Management types in irrigation: 

 Government dominates users help 

 Farmers do everything 

 Users dominate Go vernment facilities .

WATER RESOURCES ASSOCIATIONS: 

A water management paradigm refers to a set of basic assumptions 

about the nature of the system to be managed, the goals of 

management and the ways in which these management goals can be 

achieved. The paradigm is shared by epistemic community of the 

actors involved in water management. The paradigm is manifested in 

are facts such as technical infrastructure, planning approaches, 

regulations, engineering practices, etc. HISTORY OF IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT S IN INDIA: 

 Vedas, Ancient Indian writers and ancient Indian scriptures have 

references of wells, canals, tanks and dams. 

 In the south, perennial irrigation and begun with construction of 

the Grand Ancient by the Cholas as early as second century to 

provid e irrigation from the Cauvery River. 

 The central and southern India is studded with numerous 

irrigation tanks which have been traced back to many centuries 

before the beginning of the Christian era. 

 Indus Civilization flourished on the banks of rivers and the water 

was harnessed for sustenance of life. 

 Irrigation technologies during the Indus Valley Civilization were 

in the form of small and minor works like digging wells. 

IRRIGATION DURING MEDIEVAL INDIA: 

 Rapid advances took place in the construction of ca nals. 

 Water was blocked by constructing bunds across the streams. 

 Ghiyasuddin Tughluq is credited to be the first ruler, who 

encouraged digging canals. Fru Tughlug is considered to be the 

fifteenth century. 

 As agricultural income was the pillar of the eco nomy, irrigation 

systems were paid special attention during this period. 

 Babur, in his memoirs call “BABUMAMAH” gave a vivid 

description of prevalent modes of irrigation practices in India at 

that time. 

 The Gabar bunds, presently in Sindh, Pakistan, captur ed and 

stored annual runoff from surrounding mountains and river 

Sindhu (Indus) to be made available to tracks under cultivation. 

IRRIGATION IN BRITISH INDIA: 

 Rennovation, improvements and extension of works takes place.  New projects, like the upper Ganga Canal, the upper Bari Doab 

Canal and Krishna and Godavari Delta systems. 

 Major canal works like the Sirhind, the Lower Ganga, the Agra 

and the Mutha Canals, and the Periyar Dam. 

 Significant protective works constructed during the period were 

the Betwa Cana l (MP), the Nira Left Bank Canal (Maharastra), the 

Gokak Canal (Karnataka) and the Rushikulya Canal (odisha). 

IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT AFTER INDEPENDENCE: 

 To achieve set targets of economic development, the 

responsibility of irrigation development was given to the Union 

Ministry of Water Resources. 

 It took initiatives from time to time on water resources 

development and for technical assistance to the states on 

irrigation, multipurpose projects, ground water exploration and 

exploitation, drainage, flood contr ol, water logging, sea erosion 

problems, dam safety and hydraulic structures for navigation and 

hydro power. 

 Overseas the regulation and development of inter -State rivers. 

IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS UNDERTAKEN: 

(A) Command Area Development & Water Man agement (CADWM): 

To provide central assistance for development of infrastructure to 

facilitate use of sprinkler or drip irrigation systems as an alternative to 

construction of field channels. The assistance is limited to 

construction of stilling tank, pump house and laying of conveyance 

pipes up to farmer’s fields. 

(B) Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Program (AIBP): 

The ABIP was conceived the year 1996 by the government of India 

inorder to provide financial assistance to States to complete various 

ongoing projects in the country so that envisaged irrigation potential of the project could be created and thereby extend irrigation to more 

areas. 

FUTURE POSSIBILITIES OF IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT: 

 Micro -irrigation methods need to be adopted wherever possib le. 

(Drip irrigation, sprinkler, etc) 

 Revival of Diverse and community – Based irrigation systems 

 Inter basin transfer of water (Interlinking of Rivers) 

 Special measures needed to revitalize the tank irrigation. 

 Gap between potential created and utilized n eeds to be reduced 

(Completion of Canal Networks) 

 Use of sewage water for irrigation 

 Drainage improvements 

 Scope for improving crop yields. 

 Options for equitable and efficient water distribution need to be 

evolved. 

 Choosing appropriate cropping pattern for sustainable 

development.

