# CE8601 QB

Title: EASWARI ENGINEERING COLLEGE, RAMAPURAM

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/QuestionBank/CE8601-QB.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 11:01:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Page 1 

> CE 2352/

QUESTION BANK WITH ANSWER 

DEPARTMENT: CIVIL SEMESTER: 06 

SUBJECT CODE /NAME: CE8601 DESIGN OF STEEL STRUCTURES YEAR: III 

UNIT I - INTRODUCTION 

PART - A (2 marks)  

> 1.

Distinguish between gauge distance and pitch of the bolt. (NOV/DEC 

11) Gauge distance 

It is the distance between the two consecutive bolts of adjacent rows and is measured at 

right angles to the direction of load. 

Pitch distance 

It is the center to center spacing of the bolts in a row, measured along the direction of 

load.  

> 2.

What are the merits and demerits of welded connection? (NOV/DEC 

11) Merits 

Due to absence of gusset plates, connecting angles etc., welded structures are lighter. 

Welding is more adaptable than bolting or riveting. For example, even circular tubes can 

be easily connected by welding. 

Welded joints are rigid. 

Demerits 

Due to uneven heating and cooling, members are likely to distort in the process of 

welding. 

Welded joints are over rigid. 

Proper welding in field conditions is difficult.  

> 3.

What is bolt value? (MAY/JUNE 

12) 

The strength of the bolted connection is called as a bolt value. The bolt value is calculated in 

the design of bolted connection with their strength in various considerations.  

> 4.

List out the disadvantages of welded connections. (MAY/JUNE 12) 

Due to uneven heating and cooling, members are likely to distort in the process of 

welding. 

Welded joints are over rigid. 

Proper welding in field conditions is difficult. 

There is a greater possibility of brittle fracture in welding. 

Highly skilled person is required for welding. 

The inspection of welded joints is difficult. Page 2 

> 5.

Define pitch of the rivet. (MAY/JUNE 12 )

It is the center to center spacing of the rivets in a row, measured along the direction of 

load. 

. 

> 6.

What do you mean by splitting of plates? (MAY/JUNE 12 )

Splitting of plates is defined as the plates are spitted by the design of the required joint strength.  

> 7.

Define bolt. 

Bolt is a metal pin with a head formed at one end and the shank threaded at the other to receive a

nut.  

> 8.

List out the various types of welded joints. 

Butt weld 

Fillet weld 

Slot weld 

Spot weld 

Seam weld 

Pipe weld  

> 9.

Define modulus of elasticity. 

The modulus of elasticity is defined as the ratio of longitudinal strain with the elastic region, it 

is denoted by E.  

> 10.

What are the various types of connections used for connecting the structural 

members?  

> 

Riveted connections  

> 

Bolted connections  

> 

Pin connections  

> 

Welded connections  

> 11.

Define nominal diameter of rivet. 

It is the diameter of the unheated rivet measured before driving. It is the stated diameter of 

the rivet, available in the market.  

> 12.

Define gross diameter of rivet. 

It is the diameter of the rivet in the hole, measured after driving. It is taken equal to the 

diameter of the rivet hole.  

> 13.

What is meant by gauge distance and edge distance? 

Gauge distance is the perpendicular distance between two adjacent gauge lines. This is also 

called as back pitch. Edge distance is the distance of the edge of the member or the cover plates 

from the centre of extreme rivet hole. Page 3 

> 14.

Define staggered pitch. 

It is also called as alternate pitch or reeled pitch. The staggered pitch is defined as the distance 

measured along one rivet line from the centre of a rivet to the centre of the adjoining rivet on the 

adjacent parallel rivet line.  

> 15.

What is meant by tensile stress? 

When a structural member is subjected to direct axial tensile load, the stress is known as 

tensile stress ( at ). The tensile stress is calculated on net cross -sectional area of the member. 

at = (P t / An)

Where, P t is the direct axial tensile load and An is the net cross -sectional area of the member.  

> 16.

What is meant by compressive stress? 

When a structural member is subjected to direct axial compressive load, the stress is known 

as compressive stress ( ac ). The compressive stress is calculated on gross cross - sectional area 

of the member. 

ac = (P c / Ag)

Where, Pc is the direct axial compressive load and Ag is the gross -sectional area of the member.  

> 17.

Define bearing stress. 

When a load is exerted or transferred by the application of load through one surface for 

another surface in contact, the stress is known as bearing stress ( p). the bearing stress is 

calculated on net projected area of contact.  

> p

= (P / A) 

Where, P = load placed on the bearing surface. 

A = net projected area of contact.  

> 18.

What is working stress? 

The working stress is also termed as allowable stress or permissible stress. The working 

stress is evaluated by dividing yield stress by factor of safety. For the purpose of computing safe 

load carrying of a structural member, its strength is expressed in terms of working stress. The 

actual stresses resulting in a structural member from design loads should not exceed working 

stress.  

> 19.

What a re the assumptions made in simple design?  

> 

The beams are simply supported.  

> 

All connections of beams, girders, or truss are virtually flexible and are proportioned 

for the reaction shears applied at the appropriate eccentricity Page 4 

> 

The members in compression are subjected to forces applied at the appropriate 

eccentricities.  

> 

The members in tension are subjected to longitudinal forces applied over the net area of 

the sections.  

> 20.

What are the types of riveted joints?  

> i.

Lap joint  

> (a)

Single riveted lap joint  

> (b)

Double riveted lap joint  

> ii.

Butt joint  

> (a)

Single cover butt joint  

> (b)

Double cover butt joint  

> 21.

What are the types of failures occur in riveted joint?  

> 

Shear failure of rivets  

> 

Shear failure of plates  

> 

Tearing failure of rivets  

> 

Bearing failure of plates  

> 

Splitting failure of plates at the edges  

> 

Bearing failure of rivets.  

> 22.

What are the assumptions made for designing riveted joint?  

> 

The load is assumed to be uniformly distributed among all the rivets.  

> 

The shear stress on a rivet is assumed to be uniformly distributed over its gross 

area.  

> 

The bearing stress is assumed to be uniform between the contact surfaces of plate 

and rivet.  

> 

The bending stress in a rivet is neglected.  

> 

The rivet hole is assumed to be completely filled by the rivet  

> 

The stress in plate is assumed to be neglected.  

> 

The friction between plates is neglected.  

> 23.

Write about minimum pitch and maximum pitch. 

Minimum pitch : The distance between centers of adjacent rivets should not be less than 

2.5 times the gross diameter of the rivet. 

Maximum pitch : 

> 

The maximum pitch should not exceed 12t or 200 mm whichever is less in case of Page 5

compression member, and 16t or 300 mm whichever is less in case of tension member.  

> 

The distance between centres of any two consecutive rivets in a line adjacent and parallel 

to an edge of an outside pla te shall not exceed (100mm + 4t) or 200 mm, whichever is 

less in compression or tension members.  

> 

If the line of rivets (including tacking rivets) does lie in the direction of stress, the 

maximum pitch should not exceed 32 t or 300 mm whichever is less, where t is the 

thickness of the thinner outside plate.  

> 24.

What is edge distance? 

A minimum edge distance of approximately 1.5 times the gross diameter of the rivet measured 

from the centre of the rivet hole is provided in the rivet joint.  

> 25.

What are the advantages of bolted connections?  

> 

There is silence in preparing bolted connection. In riveting, hammering is done. The 

hammering causes noise in the riveting.  

> 

There is no risk of fire in bolted connection. The rivets are made red hot in riveting 

and there is risk of fire.  

> 

The bolted connections may be done quickly in comparison to the riveting.  

> 

Though the cost of bolts is more than the cost of rivets, the bolted connections are 

economical to use because less persons are required for installation, and the work 

proceeds quickly  

> 26.

What are the various types of bolts used for structural purposes?  

> 

Unfinished bolts  

> 

Turned bolts  

> 

High strength bolts  

> 27.

Give the properties of steel. 

Refer IS 800:2007, PAGE NO: 12, 2.2.4  

> 28.

Draw the structural steel sections. 

Refer IS 800:2007, PAGE NO: 19  

> 29.

Give the limit state design concepts .

Refer IS 800:2007, PAGE NO: 28  

> 30.

What are the loads on structural steel? 

Refer IS 800:2007, PAGE NO: 15, 3.2 Page 6

PART B (16 MARKS)  

> 1.

Find the maximum force which can be transferred through the double covered butt joint shown in fig. 

Find the efficiency of the joint also. Given M20 bolts of grade 4.6 and Fe410 steel plates are 

used. (NOV/DEC 11)  

> 2.

Two cover plates, 10mm and 18mm thick are connected by a double cover butt joint using 6mm cover 

plates as shown in fig. Find the strength of the joint. Given M20 bolts of grade 4.6 and Fe410 plates are 

used.(MAY/JUNE 12)  

> 3.

Find the efficiency of the lap joint shown in fig.1.with the following data: M20 bolts of grade 

4.6 and Fe410 plates are used.(NOV/DEC 11)  

> 4.

Design a lap joint between the two plates each of width 120mm,if the thickness of one plate is 

16mm and the other is 12mm.the joint has to transfer a design load of 160Kn.the plates are of 

Fe410grade.use bearing type bolts. (MAY/JUNE 12)  

> 5.

Design a single bolted double cover butt joint to connect boiler plates of thickness 12mm for 

maximum efficiency. Use M16 bolts of grade 4.6.boiler plates are of Fe 410 grade. Find the 

efficiency of the joint. (MAY/JUNE 12)  

> 6.

A bracket bolted to a vertical column is loaded as shown in fig. If M20 bolts of grade 4.6 

are used, determin e the maximum value of factored load P which can be carried 

safely.(MAY/JUNE 12)  

> 7.

A bracket is bolted to the flange of a column as shown in fig. Using 8mm thick bracket 

plate. Using M20 bolts of grade 4.6 design the connection.(NOV/DEC 12)  

> 8.

Design a suitable longitudinal fillet welds to connect the plates as shown in fig. To 

transmit a pull equal to the full strength of small plate. Given: plates are 12mm thick, grade of 

plates Fe410 and welding to be made in workshop.(NOV/DEC 12)  

> 9.

A tie member of a roof truss consists of 2 ISA 10075, 8mm.the angles are connected to 

either side of a 10mm gusset plates and the member is subjected to a working pull of 

300Kn.design the weld connection. Assume connections are made in the workshop.  

> 10.

Design a welded connection to connect two plates of width 200mm and thickness 10mm 

for 100 percent efficiency.  

> 11.

A tie member consists of two ISMC 250.the channels are connected on either side of a

12mm thick gusset plate.  

> 12.

Design the welded joint to develop the full strength of the tie. However the overlap is to 

be limited to 400mm.Determine the maximum load that can resist by the bracket shown in fig. 

By fillet weld of size 6mm, if it is shop welding.The 10mm thick bracket plate shown in fig. Is 

connected with the flange of column ISHB 3002577N/mm. find the size of the weld to transmit 

a factored load of 250Kn. Page 7 

> 13.

Design a suitable fillet weld for the bracket shown in fig. If working load P=100Kn and 

eccentricity e=150mm.thickness of the bracket plate is 12mm and the column used is ISHB 

300 @618N/m. 

UNIT – II 

CONNECTIONS IN STEEL STRUCTURES 

TWO MARK QUSTIONS AND ANSWERS 

1. What are the various types of connections used for connecting the structural members? 

Riveted connections 

Bolted connections 

Pin connections 

Welded connections 

2. Define nominal diameter of rivet. 

It is the diameter of the unheated rivet measured before driving. It is the stated diameter of the rivet, 

available in the market. 

3. Define gross diameter of rivet. 

It is the diameter of the rivet in the hole, measured after driving. It is taken equal to the diameter of the 

rivet hole. 

4. What is meant by gauge distance and edge distance? 

Gauge distance is the perpendicular distance between two adjacent gauge lines. This is also called as back 

pitch. 

Edge distance is the distance of the edge of the member or the cover plates from the centre of extreme 

rivet hole. 

5. Define staggered pitch. 

It is also called as alternate pitch or reele d pitch. The staggered pitch is defined as the distance measured 

along one rivet line from the centre of a rivet to the centre of the adjoining rivet on the adjacent parallel 

rivet line. 

6. What is meant by tensile stress? 

When a structural member is subje cted to direct axial tensile load, the stress is known as tensile stress The 

tensile stress is calculated on net cross -sectional area of the member. 

at = (P t / An)

Where, P t is the direct axial tensile load and A n is the net cross -sectional area of the member. 

7. What is meant by compressive stress? 

When a structural member is subjected to direct axial compressive load, the stress is known as 

compressive stress (  ac ). The compressive stress is calculated on gross cross -sectional area of the 

member. 

ac = (P c / Ag)

Where, P c is the direct axial compressive load and A g is the gross -sectional area of the member. 

8. Define bearing stress. 

When a load is exerted or transferred by the application of load through one surface for another surface in 

contact, the stress is known as bearing stress (  p). the bearing stress is calculated on net projected area 

of contact. Page 8

p = (P / A) 

Where, P = l oad placed on the bearing surface. 

A = net projected area of contact. 

9. What is working stress? 

The working stress is also termed as allowable stress or permissible stress. The working stress is evaluated 

by dividing yield stress by factor of safety. For the purpose of computing safe load carrying of a structural 

member, its strength is expressed in terms of working stress. The actual stresses resulting in a structural 

member from design loads should not exceed working stress. 

10 What are the methods emplo yed for the design of the steel framework? 

Simple design 

Semi -rigid design 

Fully rigid design 

Plastic design. 

11 What are the assumptions made in simple design? 

The beams are simply supported. 

All connections of beams, girders, or truss are virtually flexible and are proportioned for the 

reaction shears applied at the appropriate eccentricity 

The members in compression are subjected to forces applied at the appropriate eccentricities. 

The members in tension are subjected to longitudinal forces applied over the net area of the 

sections. 

12. Define Poisson’s Ratio. 

The Poisson’s ratio is defined as the ratio of transverse strain to the longitudinal strain under an axial load. 

It is denoted by ‘μ’ or 1/m. the value of Poisson’s ratio for steel within the elastic region ranges from 0.25 

to 0.33. 

13. What are the types of riveted joints? 

Lap joint 

Single riveted lap joint 

Double riveted lap joint 

Butt joint 

Single cover butt joint 

Double cover butt joint  

> 14.

What are the types of failures occur in riveted joint? 

Shear failure of rivets 

Shear failure of plates 

Tearing failure of rivets 

Bearing failure of plates 

Splitting failure of plates at the edges 

Bearing failure of rivets.  

> 15.

What are the assumptions made for designing riveted joint? 

The load is assumed to be uniformly distributed among all the rivets. 

The shear stress on a rivet is assumed to be uniformly distributed over its gross area. Page 9

The bearing stress is assumed to be uniform between the contact surfaces of plate and rivet. 

The bending stress in a rivet i s neglected. 

The rivet hole is assumed to be completely filled by the rivet 

The stress in plate is assumed to be neglected. 

The friction between plates is neglected.  

> 16.

Write about minimum pitch and maximum pitch. 

Minimum pitch : The distance between centres of adjacent rivets should not be less than 2.5 times the 

gross diameter of the rivet. 

Maximum pitch :

The maximum pitch should not exceed 12t or 200 mm whichever is less in case of compression 

member, and 16t or 300 mm whichever is less in case of tension member. 

The distance between centres of any two consecutive rivets in a line adjacent and parallel to an 

edge of an outside plate shall not exceed (100mm + 4t) or 200 mm, whichever is less in 

compression or tension members. 

If the line of rivets (including tacking rivets) does lie in the direction of stress, the maximum 

pitch should not exceed 32 t or 300 mm whichever is less, where t is the thickness of the 

thinner outside plate.  

> 17.

What is edge distance? 

A minimum edge distance of approximately 1.5 times the gross diameter of the rivet measured from the 

centre of the rivet hole is provided in the rivet joint.  

> 18.

What are the advantages of bolted connections? 

There is silence in preparing bolted connection. In riveting, hammering is done. The hammering 

causes noi se in the riveting. 

There is no risk of fire in bolted connection. The rivets are made red hot in riveting and there is 

risk of fire. 

The bolted connections may be done quickly in comparison to the riveting. 

Though the cost of bolts is more than the cost o f rivets, the bolted connections are economical 

to use because less persons are required for installation, and the work proceeds quickly  

> 19.

What are the various types of bolts used for structural purposes? 

Unfinished bolts 

Turned bolts 

High strength bolts  

> 20.

Wri te about the advantages of welding. 

There is silence in the process of welding. 

There is safety of welding operator in the welding. 

The welding may be done quickly in comparison to the riveting. 

The welded joints have better appearance than riveted joints. 

The welded joints are more rigid than the riveted joints  

> 21.

List the various types of welded joints. Page 10 

Butt weld 

Fillet weld 

Slot weld and plug weld 

Spot weld 

Seam weld 

Pipe weld  

> 22.

Write about the disadvantages of welding. 

The members are likely to distort in the process of welding. 

A welded joint fails earlier than riveted joint, if the structure is under fatigue stresses. 

There is a greater possibility of brittle fracture in welding than the rivet. 

The inspection of welded joint is more difficult and more exp ensive than the riveted joint. 

More skilled person is required in the welding than in the riveting.  

> 23.

What is the effective area of butt weld? 

The effective area of a butt weld is taken as the product of the effective throat thickness and the effective 

lengt h of butt weld.  

> 24.

How the length of bolt is calculated? 

The length of bolt is equal to the distance from the underside of the bolt head to the extreme end of the 

shank, including any camber or radius. 

16 MARK QUESTIONS 

1. A double riveted double cover butt joint is used to connect plates 12 mm thick. Using Unwin’s formula, 

determine the diameter of rivet; rivet value, gauge and efficiency of joint. Adopt the following stresses: 

Working stress in shear in power driven rivets = 100 N / mm 2 (Mpa) Working stress in bearing in 

power driven rivets = 300 N / mm 2 (Mpa) Working stress in axial tension in plates = 0.6 f y

2. Determine the strength of a double cover butt cover butt joint used to connect two flats 200 F

12. The thickness of each cover plate is 8 mm. flats have been joined by 9 rivets in chain riveting at a 

gauge of 60 mm. What is the efficiency of the joint? Adopt working stresses in rivets and flats as per 

IS: 800 – 1984. 

3. A load of 150 kN is applied to a bracket plate at an eccentricity of 300 mm. sixt een rivets of 20 mm 

nominal diameter are arranged in two rows with 8 rivets per row. The two rows are 200 mm apart and 

the pitch is 80 mm. if the bracket plate is 12.5 mm thick, investigate the safety of the connection. 

Given, s = 100 N / mm 2,

fb = 300 N / mm 2 and f t = 150 N / mm 2.

4. A bridge truss carries an axial pull of 400 KN. It is to be a gusset plate 22mm thick by a double cover 

butt joint with 22 mm diameter power driven rivets. Design an economical joint. Determine the 

efficiency of the joint. 

5. What are the types of load to be account for steel design? Page 11 

Unit - III TENSION MEMBERS 

PART – A

TWO MARK QUESTION AND ANSWERS 

1. Explain the tension member .

Tension members are linear members in which axial forces act so as to elongate (stretch) the 

member. A rope, for example, is a tension member. Tension members carry loads most efficiently, 

since the entire cross section is subjected to uniform stress.Unlik e compression members, they do not 

fail by buckling. 

2. Explain Behavior of tension members 

Since axially loaded tension members are subjected to uniform tensile stress, Their load 

deformation behavior (is similar to the corresponding basic material stress strain behaviour. In the 

Yield Plateau the load remains constant as the elongation increases to nearly ten times the yield 

strain. Under further stretching the material shows a smaller increase in tension with elongation, 

compared to the elastic range. 

3. Write note on Load -elongation of tension member 

Angles under tension, Angles are extensively used as tension members in trusses and 

bracings. Angles, if axially loaded through c entroid, could be designed as in the case of plates 

.However, usually angles are connected to gusset plates by bolting or welding only one of the two 

legs 

This leads to eccentric tension in the member, causing non -uniform Distribution of stress 

over the cr oss section. Further, since the load is applied by Connecting only one leg of the member 

there is a shear lag locally at the end Connections. Page 12 

4. How Angle sections eccentrically loaded through gussets plate? 

• The effect of the gusset thickness, and hence the out of plane stiffness of the end 

connection, on the ultimate tensile strength is not significant. 

• The thickness of the angle has no significant influence on the member strength. 

• The effects of shear lag, and hence the strength reduction, is higher whe n the ratio of the area of the 

outstanding leg to the total area of cross -section increases. 

• When the length of the connection (the number of bolts in end connections) increases, the tensile 

strength increases up to 4 bolts and the effect of further increase in the number of bolts, on the 

tensile strength of the member is not significant. hnology 

• Even double angles connected on opposite sides of a gusset plate experience the effect of shear 

lag 

5. What is a Lug angle? 

In order to increase the efficiency of the outstanding leg in single angles and to decrease the 

length of the end connections, some times a short length angle at the ends are connected to the 

gusset and the outstanding leg of the main angle directly, as shown in Fig.. Such angles are 

referre d to as lug angles. 

Tension member with lug angle Page 13 

6. Why Stiffener required in tension members? 

The tension members, in addition to meeting the design strength requirement, Frequently 

have to be checked for adequate stiffness. The IS: 800 impose the following limitations on the 

slenderness ratio of members subjected to tension: 

(a) In the case of members that are normally under tension but may experience compression 

due to stress reversal caused by wind / earthquake loading l / r =250 .

(b) In the case of members that are designed for tension but may experience stress reversal 

for which it is not designed (as in X bracings) l / r =350 

(c) In the case of members subjected to tension only. l / r = 40 0 In the case of rods used as a 

tension member in X bracings, the slenderness ratio limitation need not be checked for if they are 

pre -tensioned by using a turnbuckle or other such arrangement. 

7. Different types of tension members? 

i) Wires and cables 

ii) Rods and bars 

iii) Single structural shapes and plates 

iv) Built -up members 

8. Write note on tension member splice 

When a joint is to be provided in a tension member, then splice plates are used. 

Splice plates and rivets are designed for the pull required to be transmitted b y the tension member. If 

the tension members are of unequal thickness, then, packing are used to have surfaces of tension 

members in one level. 

9. What do you understand by Gross area and Net Area? 

Gross area (A g) : Total area of cross section which can be taken as equal weight of the 

member per unit length divided by density of the material is called Gross area. The sectional area 

given by the manufacturer is taken as the gross area. 

Net area (A n) : Net area is equal to the gross area less the area due to h oles in the cross 

section. 

An = A g – area of rivet holes in line. 

10. Write down the formula for finding out the net effective area for angles and Tees in 

tension. 

1. Single angle section connected by one leg angle Page 14 

Anet = A 1+A 2k

Where, A 1 = effective cross –secti onal area of connected leg. 

A2 = the gross sectional area of unconnected leg. k =3A 1/ 3A 1+A 2

2. Pair of angles back to back (or single Tee) connected by one leg angle to the same 

side of a gusset. 

Anet = A 1+A 2k

Where, A 1 = effective cross –sectional area of connected leg. 

A2 = the gross sectional area of unconnected leg. k =

5A 1/5A 1+A 2

11. A tie of a roof truss consists of double angles ISA 100X75X10 mm with its short legs 

back to back and long legs connected to the same side of a gusset plate, with 16mm diameter 

rivets. Determine the strength of tie in axial tension, taking ft = 150 N/mm 2. take rivets have 

been provided at suitable pitch. 

Dia of rivet hole = 16 + 1.5 = 17.5mm 

Each angle is weakened by one rivet hole. Hence this is case 2, where A net =

A1+A 2k and 

k = 5A 1/5A 1+A 2

A1 = Net area of connected legs= 2 [ 100 – 10/2 – 17.5] X 10 = 1550mm 2

A2 = area of connected legs = 2[75 – 10/2 ]X 10 = 1400mm 2 k

=5X1550/5X1550 X1400= 0.847 

Anet = A 1+A 2k = 1550 + 1400X0.847 = 2736mm 2

Strength = f t X A net = 150X2736 = 410369N. 

PART - B

16 MARK QUESTIONS  

> 1.

Using a lug angle, design a suitable joint for 100 mm * 65mm *10 mm angle, used as a tension 

member .use 20 mm diameter rivets and thickness of gusset plate 8 mm.  

> 2.

The bottom tie of roof truss is 4m long .in addition to an axial tension of 1000 KN,it has to 

support at its centre a shaft of load of 3600N. The member is composed of two angles 100 mm * 

75 mm* 10 mm with the longer legs turned down and placed back to bac k on either side of 10 Page 15 

mm gusset plate. The angles are tack riveted at 92 cm centres with 20 mm diameter rivets.  

> 3.

Design a horizontal tension member carrying a load 600 KN, The length of the member is 3 

mm. The member is connected to 4.5 cm thick gusset pla te 20 mm rivets.  

> 4.

Design a tension member of heavy truss carrying a force of 4400 KN ,length of the member 

being 10 metres. 

5.A bridge truss diagonal carries an axial pull of 300 KN .two mild steel flats 

250 ISF 10 and ISF 18 of the diagonal are to be jointed together. Design a suitable splice 

6. Determine the design tensile strength of the plate (200 X 10 mm) with the holes as Shown 

below, if the yield strength and the ultimate strength of the steel used are 250 MPa and 420 MPa 

and 20 mm diameter bolts a re used.fy = 250 Mpa;fu = 420 MPa Page 16 

UNIT - IV 

COMPRESSION MEMBERS 

PART – A

TWO MARK QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS  

> 1.

What is meant by short strut? 

If the strut is “short”, the applied forces will cause a compressive strain, which 

results in the shortening of the strut in the direction of the applied forces.  

> 2.

Draw the diagram of buckling of column  

> 3.

What are the assumptions made in Euler’s analysis?  

> 1.

The material is homogeneous and linearly elastic (i.e. it obeys Hooke’s 

Law).  

> 2.

The strut is perfectly straight and there are no imperfections.  

> 3.

The loading is applied at the centroid of the cross section at the ends. 

3. What are the effect of strain hardening and the absence of clearly defined 

yield point? 

If the material of the column shows strain hardening after a yield platen, the on 

set of first yield will not be affected, but the collapse load may be increased. Designers 

tend to ignore the effect of strain hardening which in fact provides an additional margin 

of safety. High strength steels generally have stress -strain curves without a clear yield 

point. At stresses above the limit of proportionality (fp), the material behaviour is 

non -linear and on unloading and reloading the material is linear -elastic. Most high Page 17 

strength structural steels have an ultimate stress beyond which the curve becomes more 

or less horizontal. 

4. Write the effect of eccentricity of applied loading 

As has already been pointed out, it is impossible to ensure that the load is applied 

at the exact centroid of the column. Fig. shows a straight column with a small 

eccentricity (e) in the applied loading. The applied load (P) induces a bending moment 

(P.e) at every cross section. This would cause the column to deflect laterally,in a manner 

similar to the initially deformed member discussed previously. Once againthe greatest 

compressive stress will occur at the concave face of the column at a section midway 

along its length. The load -deflection response for purely elastic andelastic -plastic 

behaviour is similar to those described in Fig. except that the deflection is zero at zero 

load. 

5. What are the buckled modes for different end conditions? 

6. What are the different effective lengths for different boundary condition? 

Boundary conditions  Theory  Code value 

Both ends pin ended  1.0L  1.0L 

Both ends fixed  0.5L  0.65L 

One end fixed and the other end pinned  0.707L  0.8L 

One end fixed, and the other free to 

sway  1.2L  1.2L Page 18 

One end fixed and the other end free  2.0L  2.0L 

7. What is meant by flexural buckling and torsional –flexural buckling? 

When the strut buckles b jy bending in a plane of symmetry of the cross section, 

referred to as “flexural buckling” . Singly symmetric or un -symmetric cross -sections 

may undergo combined twisting about the shear centre and a translate jon of the shear 

centre. This is known as “torsional – flexural buckling”. 

8. What are Steps in the design of axially loaded columns? 

The procedure for the design of an axially compressed column is as follows: 

(i) Assume a suitable trial section and classify the section in accordance with the 

classification in chapter. 

(ii) Arrive at the effective length of the column by suitably considering the end 

conditions. 

(iii) Calculate the slenderness ratios (λ values) in both minor and major axes direction 

(iv) Calculate fcd values along both major and minor axes 

(v) Compute the load that the compression member can resist (pd=A cfcd )

9. Write about batten plates compression member. 

When compression members are required for large structures like bridges, it 

willbe necessary to use built -up sections. They are particularly useful when loads are 

heavy and members are long (e.g. top chords of Bridge Trusses). Built up sections 

[illustrated in Fig.] are popular in India when heavy loads are encountered. The cross 

section consists of two channel sections connected on their open sides with some type of 

lacing or latticing (dotted lines) to hold the parts together and ensure that they act 

together as one unit. The ends of these members are connected with “batten plate s” 

which tie the ends together. 

10. What are the three classifications for determination of size of plate? 

Class I- will pertain to all base plates the moment on which is so small in 

proportion to the direct load that there is compression over the entire area between the 

bottom of the base and its foundation Page 19 

Class II - will pertain a comparatively small range of base plates which have 

tension over a small portion - one - third or loss of the area 

Class III - will include those which are exposed to a comparativel y large moment 

and which therefore have tension over a large portion - more than one -third of the area 

between the bottom of the base plate and its concrete footing. 

11. Draw the column base plate diagram 

12. What is the purpose for providing anchors bolt in base plate? 

Anchor bolts are provided to stabilize the column during erection and to prevent 

uplift for cases involving large moments. Anchor bolts can be cast -in place bolts or 

drilled -in bolts. The latter are placed after the concrete in set and are not too often used. 

Their design is governed by the manufacturer's specifications. Cast -in -place bolts are 

hooked bars, bolts, or threaded rods with nuts (figure) placed before the concrete is set.      

> UNIT –V
> Design of Flexural Members
> PART -A
> TWO MARK QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

1. What are main benefits of using composite floors with profiled steel decking? 

i. Savings in steel weight are typically 30% to 50% over non -composite Construction 

ii. Greater stiffness of composite beams results in shallower depths for the same span. Hence  

> lower storey heights are adequate resulting in savings in cladding costs, reduction in wind loading
> and savings in foundation costs.

Page 20 

iii. Faster rate of construction. 

2. Explain about the importance of steel decking. 

• It supports loads during cons truction and acts as a working platform 

• It develops adequate composite action with concrete to resist the imposed loading 

• It transfers in -plane loading by diaphragm action to vertical bracing or shear walls 

• It stabilizes the compression flanges of the beams against lateral buckling, until concrete 

hardens. 

• It reduces the volume of concrete in tension zone 

• It distributes shrinkage strains, thus preventing serious cracking of concrete 

3. What is meant by Composite Beam Stage 

The composite beam formed by empl oying the profiled steel sheeting is different from the one with a 

normal solid slab, as the profiling would influence its strength and stiffness. This is termed ‘composite beam 

stage’. In this case, the profiled deck, which is fixed transverse to the 

beam , results in voids within the depth of the associated slab. 

4. Write short notes on composite slab stage 

The structural behaviour of the composite slab is similar to that of a reinforced concrete beam with no 

shear reinforcement. Steel sheeting provides adequ ate tensile capacity in order to act with the concrete in 

bending. However, the shear between the steel and concrete must be carried by friction and bond between the 

two materials. The mechanical keying action of the indents is important. This is especiall y so in open 

trapezoidal profiles, where the indents must also provide resistance to vertical separation. 

5. What are economical considerations for industrial truss? 

• Method of fabrication and erection to be followed, facility for shop fabrication available, transportation 

restrictions, field assembly facilities. 

• Preferred practices and past experience. 

• Availability of materials and sections to be used in fabrication. 

• Erection technique to be followed and erection stresses. 

• Method of connection preferred by the contractor and client (bolting, welding or riveting). 

• Choice of as rolled or fabricated sections. 

• Simple design with maximum repetition and minimum inventory of material. 

6. Write about basics of plastic analysis? 

In plastic analysis and design of a structure, the ultimate load of the structure as a whole is regarded 

as the design criterion. The term plastic has occurred due to the fact that the ultimate load is found from the 

strength of steel in the plastic range. Page 21 

This method is rapid and provides a rational approach for the analysis of the structure. It also provides 

striking economy as regards the weight of steel since the sections required by this method are smaller in size 

than those required by the method of e lastic analysis. 

7. What is meant by first yield moment? 

As W is increased gradually, the bending moment at every section increases and the stresses also 

increase. At a section close to the support where the bending moment is maximum, the stresses in the ext reme 

fibers reach the yield stress. The moment corresponding to this state is called the first yield moment My , of 

the cross section. 

8. Write about Principles of plastic analysis 

(i) Mechanism condition: The ultimate or collapse load is reached when a mechanism is formed. The number 

of plastic hinges developed should be just sufficient to form a mechanism. 

(ii) Equilibrium condition: ΣFx = 0, ΣFy = 0, ΣMxy = 0

(iii) Plastic moment condition: The bending moment at any section of the structure should not be more than 

the fully plastic moment of the section. 

9. State that Uniqueness theorem 

If both the above criteria are satisfied, then the resulting load factor corresponds to its value at rigid 

plastic collapse (λp). 

10. Explain about Crane gantry girders 

The function of the c rane girders is to support the rails on which the traveling cranes move. These are 

subjected to vertical loads from crane, horizontal lateral loads due to surge of the crane, that is, the effect of 

acceleration and braking of the loaded crab and swinging o f the suspended load in the transverse direction, 

and longitudinal force due to acceleration and braking of the crane as a whole. 

11. What are the different types of floors used in steel -framed buildings? 

a) Concrete slabs supported by open -web joists? 

b) One -way and two -way reinforced concrete slabs supported on steel beams 

c) Concrete slab and steel beam composite floors 

d) Profiled decking floors 

e) Pre -cast concrete slab floors. 

12. What are the advantages of steel -decking floors? 

(i) They do not need form work 

(ii) The lightweight concrete is used resulting in reduced dead weight 

(iii) The decking distributes shrinkage strains, thus prevents serious cracking Page 22 

(iv) The decking stabilizes the beam against lateral buckling, until the concrete 

(v) The cells in decking are convenient for locating services. 

13. Write about Pre -cast concrete floors 

Pre -cast concrete floors offer speedy erection and require only minimal formwork. 

Light -weight aggregates are generally used in the concrete, making the elements light and easy to handle. 

Typical pre -cast con crete floor slab sections are shown in Fig. It is necessary to use cast in place mortar 

topping of 25 to 50 mm before installing other 

Floor coverings. Larger capacity cranes are required for this type of construction when compared with those 

required for profiled decking. Usually pre -stressing of the pre -cast elements is also done. 

14. What are assumptions are made for arrangement of live load in the analysis of frames? 

i) Consideration is limited to combination of and Design dead load on all spans with full design live load on two 

adjacent spans 

a) Design dead load on all spans with full design live load on alternate pans When design live load does not 

exceed three -fourths of the design dead load, the load arrangement of design dead load and design live loa d

on all the spans can be used. 

15. Explain about Drift Analysis 

Drift in building frames is a result of flexural and shear mode contributions, due to the column axial 

deformations and to the diagonal and girder deformations, respectively. In low -rise braced s tructures, the 

shear mode displacements are the most significant and, will largely determine the lateral stiffness of the 

structure. 

In medium to high -rise structures, the higher axial forces and deformations in the columns, and the 

accumulation of their effects over a greater height, cause the flexural component of displacement to become 

dominant. 

PART - BPage 23 

16 -MARK QUESTIONS 

1.A roof truss - shed is to be built Jodhpur city area for an industrial use. Determine the basic wind pressure 

.The use of shed 18 m* 30 m 

2. An industrial roof shed of size 20 m* 30 m is proposed to be constructed at Mangalore near a hillock of 160 

m and slo pe is 1 in 2.8. The roof shed is to be built at a height of 120 m from the base of the hill. Determine 

the design wind pressure on the slope. The height of roof shed shall be 12m 

3.A communications tower of 80 m height is proposed to be built hill top heig ht 520 m with a gradient of 1in 

5. The horizontal approach distance is 2.8 m km from the level ground .The tower 

is proposed at Abu mount .Determine the design wind pressure. 

4. Locate the principal axes of ISA 200 mm* 100 mm * 10 mm. Determine principal mom ent of inertia and 

radius of gyration about the principal axes for this angle section. 

5. LB 200 @ 0.198 kN/m is subjected to bending moment 12 kN -m. The plate of loading passes through 

centroid of beam and it is inclined 8 o with the YY -axis in the anti - clockwise direction. Locate the neutral 

axis. Determine maximum bending stress induced stress in the beam section. 

6. Design a purlin for a roof truss having the following data: 

Span of the truss = 6.0m Spacing of truss = 3m c/ c. 

Inclinaion of roof = 30 o

Spacing of Purlin = 2m c/c 

Wind pressure = 1.5 kN/m 2

Roof coverage = A.C Sheeting weighing 200 N/m 2

Provide a channel section Purlin. (Dec 2007). 

1. Design a gantry girder to be used in an industrial building carrying an EOT crane for the following data: 

Crane capacity = 200 kN. 

Total self weight of all components = 240 kN. Minimum 

approach at th carne hook of gantry girder = 1.2m Wheel base = 3.5m 

C/C distance between gantry rails = 16m 

C/C distance between columns = 8m 

Self weight of rail section = 300 N/m 

Yield stress = 250 N/mm 2

Design the main gantry section. Connection design not required. . (Dec 2007). 

2. Design the angle purlin for the following specifications: Span of truss =

9m c/c. Page 24 

Pitch = 1/5 of span 

Spacing of purli n = 1.4 c/c. Load from 

roofing material = 200 N/m 2. Wind load =

1200 N/m 2.

3. Determine the dead load, live load and wind load on a FINK type truss for the following data and mark the 

loads on the nodes of the truss. 

Span = 12m 

Pitch = ¼ of span 

Height at eves level = 10m from the ground Spacing of 

truss = 5m c/c. 

4. Design the step by step procedure for design of vertical and horizontal stiffeners in a plate girder. 

(Nov/Dec 2007)

