# CE8603 LP

Title: Microsoft Word - CE8603-LP.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LessonPlan/CE8603-LP.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 05 Dec 2022 15:59:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 3

Markdown Content:
1

# Mohamed Sathak A.J college of Engineering, Chennai. 

DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 

LESSON PLAN 

Course/Branch : B.E Civil Engineering Total no. of hours given in syllabus: 

Subject Code : CE8603 Lecture : 45 

Subject Title : Irrigation Engineering Tutorials : 0

Year/Semester : II/III Practical : 0

Faculty Name : Mr. R.B. Rakesh TOTAL : 45 

Regulation : 2017 Credits : 03 

COURSE OBJECTIVES :

 The student is exposed to different phases in irrigation practices and Planning and 

management of irrigation. Further they will be imparted required knowledge on Irrigation 

storage and distribution canal system and Irrigation management. 

COURSE OUTCOMES :

Students will be able to 

 Have knowledge and skills on crop water requirements. 

 Understand the methods and management of irrigation. 

 Gain knowledge on types of Impounding structures 

 Understand methods of irrigation including canal irrigation. 

 Get knowledge on water management on optimization of water use. 

Sl.No. Topic No. of 

Periods 

Text / 

Reference 

Books 

Page No. Method 

UNIT I CROP WATER REQUIREMENT 9

Objective: 

Have knowledge a nd skills on crop water requirements 

1 Need and classification of 

irrigation - historical development 1 T1 1, 225 Chalk and Board 

2 merits and demerits of irrigation 1 T1 1 - 7 Chalk and Board 

3 types of crops- 1

T1 219, 11, 

24, 28 -

30 

Chalk and Board 

4 crop season-duty, delta and base 

period - 1 T1 225 - 230 Chalk and Board 

5 consumptive use of crops- 2 T1 24 Chalk and Board 

6

estimation of Evapotranspiration 

using experimental and theoretical 

methods 

3

T1 

73 - 81 

Chalk and Board  

> FORMAT NO: LP 01
> ISSUE NO: 1
> ISSUE DATE: 12 -12 -2019

2

UNIT II IRRIGATION METHODS 9

Objective: 

Understand the methods and manage ment of irrigation. 

1 Tank irrigation – Well irrigation 2 T1 239 Chalk and Board 

2 Irrigation methods: Surface and 

Sub -Surface and Micro Irrigation 2 T1 34 Chalk and Board 

3 – design of drip and sprinkler 

irrigation 2 T1 35 Chalk and Board 

4 ridge and furrow irrigation 1 T1 27 Chalk and Board 

5

Irrigation scheduling – Water 

distribution system- Irrigation 

efficiencies. 

2

T1 

79 Chalk and Board 

UNIT III DIVERSION AND IMPOUNDING STRUCTURES 9

Objective: 

 The objective of this unit is to help students to Gain knowledge on types of Impounding 

structures 

1 Types of Impounding structures 1 T1 

346 -348 Chalk and Board 

2 Gravity dam 2

T1 

359, 

399 -404 

Chalk and Board 

3 Forces on a dam -Design of Gravity 

dams 2 T1 434-436 

445 -452 Chalk and Board 

4 Earth dams 1 T1 566-567 

568 Chalk and Board 

5 Arch dams 1 T1 568 Chalk and Board 

6 Diversion Head works - Weirs and 

Barrages - 2 T1 Chalk and Board 

UNIT IV CANAL IRRIGATION 9

Objective: 

Understand methods of irrigation including canal irrigation 

1 Canal regulations, canal alignment 1 T1 799 Chalk and Board 

2 Canal drop 1 T1 802 Chalk and Board 

3 Cross drainage works- 1 T1 843 Chalk and Board 

4 Kennedy’s and Lacey’s Regime 

theory 2 T1 654,669 Chalk and Board 

5 Design of unlined canal 2 T1 608 Chalk and Board 

6 Canal outlets, direct sluice 1 T1 781 Chalk and Board 

7 Design of prismatic canal 1 T1 789 Chalk and Board 

UNIT V WATER MANAGEMENT IN IRRIGATION 93

Objective: 

 Get knowl edge on w ater management on optimization of water use. 

1 Modernization techniques-

Rehabilitation 1 Re 

http://ww 

w.fao.org/ 

tempref/a 

gl/AGLW 

/Morini/0 

7_IRRIG 

ATION.p 

df 

Chalk and Board 

2 Optimization of water use-

Minimizing water losses 1 Re Chalk and Board 

3

On form development works-

Participatory irrigation 

management -

1

Re 

Chalk and Board 

4 Water resources associations 1 Re Chalk and Board 

5 Changing paradigms in water 

manag ement - 2 Re Chalk and Board 

6 Performance evaluation-Economic 

aspects of irrigation 3 Re Chalk and Board 

Assignment / Case Studies / Tutorials /Quiz / Mini Projects / Model Development / Task 

1. Assignment on contour surveying. 

TEXT BOOK 

1. Dilip Kumar Majumdar, “Irrigation Water Management”, Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi, 

2008. 

2. Punmia B.C., et. al; Irrigation and water power Engineering, Laxmi Publications, 16th Edition, 

New Delhi, 2009 

3. Garg S. K., “Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic structures”, Khanna Publishers, 23rd 

Revised Edition, New Delhi, 2009 

REFERENCES: 

1. Duggal, K.N. and Soni, J.P., “Elements of Water Resources Engineering”, New Age 

International Publishers, 2005 

2. Linsley R.K. and Franzini J.B, “Water Resources Engineering”, McGraw-Hill Inc, 2000 

3. Chaturvedi M.C., “Water Resources Systems Planning and Management”, Tata McGraw-Hill 

Inc., New Delhi, 1997. 

PREPARED BY, APPROVED BY,

