# CE8703 LP

Title: CE8703 Structural Design and Drawing.xlsx

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LessonPlan/CE8703-LP.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 11:00:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 2

Markdown Content:
MOHAMED SATHAK A J COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING, Chennai - 603103 

LESSON PLAN - THEORY 

Department of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

Name of the Subject  Structural Design and Drawing  Name of the handling 

faculty  R.EMILREYAN 

Subject Code  CE8703  Year / Sem  IV/VII 

## Course Objective 

This course aims at providing students with a solid background on the principles of structural engineering design. Students w ill be acquire the knowledge of liquid retaining structures, bridges 

components, retaining wall and industrial structures. 

## Course Outcome 

Design and draw reinforced concrete Cantilever and Counterfort Retaining Walls 

Design and draw flat slab as per code provisions 

Design and draw reinforced concrete and steel bridges 

Design and draw reinforced concrete and steel water tanks 

Design and detail the various steel trusses and Gantry girders 

Lesson Plan 

Sl. No.  Topic(s)                  

> T/R* Periods
> Required
> Mode of Teaching (BB /
> PPT /NPTEL /MOOC /
> etc )
> Blooms Level (L1 -L6) CO

PO 

> Book

## UNIT I RETAINING WALLS 

1 Introduction  T1  3 PPT  L2  CO1 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

2 Cantilever retaining wall with shear key  T1  5 PPT  L2  CO1 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

3 Cantilever retaining wall with inclined backfill  T1  4 PPT  L3  CO1 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

4 Counterfort retaining wall  T1  3 BB  L3  CO1 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

Suggested Activity: Assignment - Design and drwaing of retaining walls 

Evaluation method : Paper based 

## UNIT II FLAT SLAB AND BRIDGES 

5 Design of Flat Slabs with and without drops by Direct 

Design Method of IS code  T1,R1,R3  2 BB  L3  CO2 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

6 Design and Drawing Flat Slabs  T1  2 PPT  L3  CO2 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

7 IRC Specifications and Loading  T2  2 PPT  L3  CO2 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

8 RC Solid Slab Bridge  T1  2 PPT  L3  CO2 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

9 Steel Foot  T1  1 PPT  L2  CO2 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

10  Over Bridge - Design and Drawing  T1  6 BB  L3  CO2 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

Suggested Activity: Case Studies of slab bridges 

Evaluation method : Paper based 

## UNIT III LIQUID STORAGE STRUCTURES 

11  RCC Water Tanks  T1  3 PPT  L2  CO3 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

12  On ground, Elevated Circular, underground Rectangular 

Tanks  T1  3 PPT  L3  CO3 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

13  Hemispherical Bottomed Steel Water Tank  T1  3 PPT  L2  CO3 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

14  Design and Drawing  T1  6 BB  L3  CO3 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

Suggested Activity: Case Studies - Overhead water tanks 

Evaluation method : PPT Presentation 

## UNIT IV INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES 

15  Design of I purlin  T1  4 PPT  L2  CO4 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

16  Design of channel purlin  T1  4 PPT  L2  CO4 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

17  Design of angle purlin  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO4 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

18  Beam columns  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO4 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

19  Steel truss  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO4 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

20  Design and Drawing  T1  1 BB  L3  CO4 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

Suggested Activity: Assignment on Roofing elements 

Evaluation method : Paper based 

## UNIT V GIRDERS AND CONNECTIONS 

49  Plate Girders  T1  1 PPT  L2  CO5 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

50  Behaviour of Components  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO5 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

51  Deign of Welded Plate Girder  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO5 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

52  Design of Industrial Gantry Girders  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO5 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

53  Design of Eccentric Shear and Moment Resisting 

connections.  T1  2 PPT  L2  CO5 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

54  Design and Drawing  T1  6 BB  L3  CO5 

PO1,PO2, 

PO3,PO4 

Suggested Activity: Case Studies - Plate girders 

Evaluation method 

Content Beyond the Syllabus Planned 

1 Construction of walls for overway bridges 2 Designing procedures and standards for bridges 

Text Books 

1 Krishnaraju N, Structural Design and Drawing, Universities Press, 2009. 

2 Punmia B.C,Ashok Kumar Jain and Arun KumarJain,Comprehensive Design of Steel Structures, Laxmi Publications Pvt. Ltd., 2003. 

Reference Books 

1 Krishnamurthy D,Structural Design and Drawing VolI,IIandIII,CBS Publishers, 2010. 

2 Shah V L and Veena Gore,Limit State Design of Steel Structures 

3 IS 456(2000) Indian Standard Plain and Reinforced Concrete -Code of Practice, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi. 

4 IS800 -2007 ,Structures Publications, 2009. 

Website / URL References 

1 https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bu5jehcXjzs 

2 https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=9E4M6MCD4a I

Blooms Level 

Level 1 (L1) : Remembering  Lower Order 

Thinking 

Fixed Hour 

Exams 

Level 4 (L4) : Analysing  Higher 

Order 

Thinking 

Projects /

Mini 

Projects 

Level 2 (L2) : Understanding  Level 5 (L5) : Evaluating 

Level 3 (L3) : Applying  Level 6 (L6) : Creating 

## Mapping syllabus with Bloom’s Taxonomy LOT and HOT 

## Unit No  Unit Name  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  LOT  HOT  Total 

Unit 1 RETAINING WALLS  0 6 9 0 0 0 15  0 15 

Unit 2 FLAT SLAB and BRIDGES  0 14  1 0 0 0 15  0 15 

Unit 3 LIQUID STORAGE STRUCTURES  0 6 9 0 0 0 15  0 15 

Unit 4 INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES  0 9 6 0 0 0 15  0 15 

Unit 5 GIRDERS AND CONNECTIONS  0 9 6 0 0 0 15  0 15 

## Total  0 44  31  0 0 0 75  0 75 

## Total Percentage  0 59%  41%  0 0 0 100%  0 100% 

CO PO Mapping 

PO1  PO2  PO3  PO4  PO5  PO6  PO7  PO8  PO9  PO10  PO11  PO12  PSO1  PSO2 

CO1  3 2 3 2 2 2

CO2  3 2 3 2 2 2

CO3  3 2 3 2 2 2

CO4  3 2 2 2 2

CO5  3 2 3 2 2 2

CO6  3.00  2.00  3.00  2.00  2.00  2.00 

Avg 

Justification  for  CO -PO  mapping 

CO1 

PO1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals, and an engineering special ization to the solution of complex engineering problems. PO2. Problem analysis: 

Identify, formulate, review research literature, and analyze complex engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principle s of mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences. PO3. 

Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex en gineering problems and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate consideration for the public health 

and safety, and the cultural, societal, and environmental considerations. PO4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research -based knowledge and research methods including design of experiments, 

analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions. 

CO2 

PO1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of math ematics, science, engineering fundamentals, and an engineering specialization to the solution of complex engineering problems . PO2. Problem analysis: 

Identify, formulate, review research literature, and analyze complex engineering problems reaching substan tiated conclusions using first principles of mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences. PO3. 

Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate consideration for the public health 

and safety, and the cultural, societal, and environmental considerations. PO4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Us e research -based knowledge and research methods including design of experiments, 

analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions. 

CO3 

PO1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals, and an engineering special ization to the solution of complex engineering problems.PO2. Problem analysis: 

Identify, formulate, review research literature, and analyze complex engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principles of mathematics, natural sciences, and en gineering sciences.PO3. 

Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate consideration for the public health 

and safety, and the cult ural, societal, and environmental considerations.PO4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research -based knowledge and research methods including design of experiments, 

analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the information to pr ovide valid conclusions. 

CO4 

PO1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals, and an engineering special ization to the solution of complex engineering problems.PO2. Problem analysis: 

Identify, formulate, review research literature, and analyze complex engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principle s of mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences.PO3. 

Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex en gineering problems and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate consideration for the public health 

and safety, and the cultural, societal, and environmental considerations.PO4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research -based knowledge and research methods including design of experiments, 

analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions. 

CO5 

PO1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals, and an engineering specialization to the solution of complex engineering prob lems.PO2. Problem analysis: 

Identify, formulate, review research literature, and analyze complex engineering problems reaching subs tantiated conclusions using first principles of mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences.PO3. 

Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems and design system components or processes that meet the specifie d needs with appropriate consideration for the public health 

and safety, and the cultural, societal, and environmental considerations.PO4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research -based knowledge and research methods including design of exp eriments, 

analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions. 

3 High level  2 Moderate level  1 Low level 

*Kindly sign with date 

Name & Sign of Faculty Incharge :

Name & Sign of Subject Expert :

Head of the Department :

Format No :TLP 05  Rev.No.: 01  Rev. Date: 10.08.2022

