# EN8491 QB

Title: EN8491-QB.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/QuestionBank/EN8491-QB.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 11:02:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
MOHAMED SATHAK A J 

COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING 

DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

QUESTION BANK 

EN8491 -WATER SUPPLY 

ENGINEERING 

Regulation – 2017 

PREPARED BY 

RAKESH R B 

Assistant Professor / Civil QUESTION BANK 

(As per Anna University 2017 Regulation) 

SUBJECT CODE/NAME: EN8491 -WATER SUPPLY ENGINEERING 

SEM/YEAR: V/III 

UNIT I - SOURCES OF WATER 

Public water supply system -Planning - Objectives -Design period - Population forecasting - Water demand -Sources 

of water and their characteristics -Surface and Groundwater - Impounding Reservoir - Development and selection of 

source - Source Water quality - Characterization -Significance -Drinking 

water quality standards 

PART A

Q.NO  QUESTIONS  BT 

LEVEL  COMPETENCE 

1.  Define potable water.  BT -1 Remembering 

2.  List out the various reasons for water demand encountered in recent 

Times.  BT -1 Remembering 

3.  Define design period.  BT -1 Remembering 

4.  Name the drinking water quality standards for any four physic -

Chemical parameters.  BT -1 Remembering 

5.  What are the components of water supply system?  BT -1 Remembering 

6.  Outline the various sources of water.  BT -2 Understanding 

7.  Compare and contrast between carbonate and non -carbonate 

hardness.  BT -2 Understanding 

8.  Explain the factors influencing the design period.  BT -4 Analyzing 

9.  Write the maximum acceptable limit of the following for the public 

drinking water. 

i. Color 

ii. pH 

iii. Chlorides 

iv. Sulphates. 

BT -5 Evaluating 10.  Write in brief about the recharge of ground water.  BT2  Understanding 

11.  What is water demand? State its types  BT3  Applying 

12.  Define per capita demand. How is per capita demand for water 

Calculated ? BT4  Analyzing 

13.  Define BOD  BT5  Evaluating 

PART B 

1.  i. Describe a few lines about water demand. (3) 

ii. In two periods each of 20 years a city has grown from 

50000 to 110000 and 160000. Tell the population expected in 

the next 20 years and also the saturation population. (10) 

BT -1 Remembering 

2.  Identify the daily water demand of the city in 2031, if the per capita 

water demand is 135 Lpcd and the city population records is as given 

below. 

Census 1950 1965 1980 1995 2010 

Year 

Population 25000 52000 94000 164000 247000 

BT -1 Remembering 

3.  The population of a town as per census records is given below. Calculate 

the population in the year 2020 and 2035 using arithmetical increase 

method and incremental increase method. Estimate the water demand at 

135 LPCD for the year 2035. 

Census 1935 1955 1975 1995 2015 

Year 

Population 39250 54390 68010 83630 99850 

BT -1 Remembering 4.  i. Discuss the factors to be considered in fixing the design 

period for water supply components. (8) 

ii. Discuss about the drinking water quality standards as per BIS. 

(5) 

BT -2 Understanding 

5.  i. Briefly discuss about the various types of aquifer’s with neat sketch. 

(7) 

ii. What are the factors influencing the population forecasting? (6) 

BT -2 Understanding 

6.  i. Discuss the factors that affect the rate of water demand (7) 

ii. Explain about fire demand -its characteristics and the method of 

estimating it (6) 

BT -3 Applying 

7.  Describe the different sources of water and their characteristics 

with respect to Turbidity, Hardness, Chloride and Microbiology. 

BT -1 Remembering 

8.  i. Classify the different types of springs. (5) 

ii. With neat sketch, explain how water is drawn from infiltration 

galleries. (8) 

BT -4 Analyzing 

9.  Summarize various sources of water and give a brief account of the 

characteristics of water. 

BT -2 Understanding 

10.  Explain the different methods used for prediction of future population of 

a city, with reference to the design of a water supply system. 

BT -4 Analyzing 

PART C 

1.  i. Discuss about the water quality standards available to 

characterize the drinking water quality. (5) 

ii. Explain the chemical characteristics of water (10) 

BT -2 Understanding 

2.  Briefly discuss about the various physic -chemical test on water and 

write their limitation for domestic and industrial purpose. 

BT -1 Remembering 

3.  Enumerate and explain the characteristics of surface water and 

ground water and state their environmental significance. 

BT -4 Analyzing UNIT II - CONVEYANCE FROM THE SOURCE 

Water supply -intake structures -Functions -Pipes and conduits for water - Pipe materials - Hydraulics of 

flow in pipes -Transmission main design -Laying, jointing and testing of pipes - appurtenances - Types and 

capacity of pumps -Selection of pumps and pipe materials. 

Q.N 

O

QUESTIONS  BT 

LEVEL  COMPETENCE 

1.  Define intake.  BT -1 Remembering 

2.  List functions of intake structures.  BT -1 Remembering 

3.  List out the various joint’s in cast iron pipes.  BT -1 Remembering 

4.  Name the types of intake according to their position.  BT -1 Remembering 

5.  How the corrosion of metal pipes is reduced?  BT -2 Remembering 

6.  Predict the factors controlling the choice of materials for water 

conduits. 

BT -4 Analyzing 

7.  Illustrate the properties of Ductile Iron pipes.  BT -3 Applying 

8.  Compare gravity conduits with pressure conduits.  BT -4 Analyzing 

9.  What are the advantages and limitations of RCC pipes?  BT -6 Evaluating 

10.  Write down the formulae to find out head loss caused by pipe 

friction.  BT -5 Creating 

11.  Define pipe appurtenances and identify their role.  BT -1 Remembering 

12.  Highlight the criteria required for the pipe materials in the water 

supply system.  BT -1 Remembering 

13.  Explain the various pipe appurtenances used in water conveyance 

system. 

BT -4 Analyzing 

14.  Mention the basis for the selection of types and capacity of pumps.  BT2  Understanding 

15.  What is meant by economic diameter of a pumping main?  BT -4 Analyzing PART B 

1.  i. List out the important considerations which govern the 

selection of site of an intake structure? (6) 

ii. Describe the salient features of river intake with the aid of a 

neat sketch. (7) 

BT -1 Remembering 

2.  What are the basic requirements of a pipe joint? Describe the 

various pipe joints with neat sketches. 

BT -1 Remembering 

3.  Discuss about the wet and dry intake tower to draw water from the 

reservoir. 

BT -2 Understanding 

4.  Classify the types of intakes. Also explain the working of a

reservoir intake with a neat sketch. 

BT -2 Understanding 

5. i. List the requirements of a good piping material. (6) 

ii.Quantity of water required by a town is 20,000m 3/day. The pumps 

are working against a total head of 40m, for 8 hours. 

Total length of the main is 20km, f=0.075. Design the size of the 

main using Darcy -Weisbach formula. Assume any other 

data required. (7) 

BT -5 Evaluating 

6. i. List the factors to be considered in the selection of Pipe 

material for water transmission and describe it briefly. (6) 

ii. Explain the methods of transmission main system. (7) 

BT -1 Remembering 

7. What are the different types of pipe materials used in the water 

transmission? 

BT -1 Remembering 

8.  Summarize few lines about the functioning of a jet pump with a

neat sketch. 

BT -2 Understanding 

9.  Illustrate the different types of pipe appurtenances used in water 

supply project. 

BT -3 Applying 

10.  Explain the different types of pumps used in water supplies with a

neat sketch. 

BT -4 Analyzing 

11.  i. Prepare the key features of testing and laying of pipeline. (8) 

ii. Explain the principle operation of a centrifugal pump with neat 

sketch. (5) 

BT -6 Creating PART C 

1.  Mention the points which should be taken into consideration in 

deciding the location of an intake for the water supply of a large 

town, the source being a perennial river. Draw a neat sketch of a

canal intake and explain the salient features. 

BT -6 Creating 

2.  i. Explain briefly the steps involved in water supply pipe line 

installation. (9) 

ii. Write brief notes on laying pipe lines and testing of 

pipelines. (6) 

## BT -2 Understanding 

3.  Give a detailed account on the selection of pumps and pipe 

materials suitable for the conveyance system.  BT -3 Applying UNIT - III WATER TREATMENT 

Objectives - Unit operations and processes - Principles, functions design of water treatment plant units, 

Aerators of Flash mixers, Coagulation and flocculation -Clariflocculator -plate and tube settlers -Pulsator 

clarifier -Sand filters -Disinfection - Residue management -Construction, Operation & Maintenance aspects .

PART A

Q.NO  QUESTIONS  BT 

LEVEL  COMPETENCE 

1.  Define: Detention time and surface over flow rate.  BT 1  Remembering 

2.  Explain the term coagulation.  BT 5  Evaluating 

3.  List out advantages of rapid sand filter.  BT 1  Remembering 

4.  Mention the advantages of chlorine, as disinfectant.  BT 1  Remembering 

5.  State the function of sedimentation tanks.  BT 1  Remembering 

6.  Write the nature of any four coagulants.  BT 6  Creating 

7.  Differentiate between unit operation and unit process.  BT 2  Understanding 

8.  Discuss the significances of velocity gradient in flocculator design.  BT 2  Understanding 

9.  Differentiate between sterilization and disinfection.  BT 2  Understanding 

10.  Describe the tests to be done to find the residual chlorine in water.  BT 2  Understanding 

11.  Illustrate the mechanism of disinfection process.  BT 3  Applying 

12.  Discover the factors which depends the dose of coagulants.  BT 3  Applying 

13.  Show the layout plan of water treatment plant.  BT 3  Applying 

14.  Compare the objectives of Screen chamber and Grit chamber.  BT 4  Analyzing 

15.  What are Flocculators?  BT2  Understanding PART B 

1.  i. Develop the design for a rectangular sedimentation tank for 

5 MLD flow. (7) 

ii. Draw and label the parts of the rectangular sedimentation 

tank(Longitudinal section) indicating the various zones. (6) 

BT 1  Remembering 

2.  Estimate the volume of a clariflocculator for a proposed water 

treatment plant with a capacity of 80 ML/d and draw a neat sketch 

of the unit. 

BT 2  Understanding 

3.  i. Estimate the settling velocity of a particle of 0.06 mm 

diameter having specific gravity of 2.65 in temperature of 

20˚C. Take kinematic viscosity as 1.007 x 10 -6 m2/ sec. (7) 

ii. Write the design principles of flash mixer and flocculator.(6) 

BT 2  Understanding 

4.  Explain about slow sand filter and rapid sand filter with suitable 

diagram and also write their advantages over them. 

BT 4  Analyzing 

5.  Show the design of a slow sand filer for a town of population 

60000 persons,provided water supply rate of 160 Lpcd. Take 

filtration rate as 2.5 litersperminute, m2, L/B ratio as 2, maximum 

demand as 1.8 times average demand. 

BT 1  Remembering 

6.  Describe Chlorination and its types. Explain the various process or 

methods. 

BT 4  Analyzing 

7.  i. Calculate the average chlorine required per day to treat 

150MLD of water. Also calculate the storage required for 

60 days. Assume an average chlorine dosage of 5mg/l. (7) 

ii. Illustrate the various unit operations and unit processes 

involved in water treatment. (6 )

BT 3  Applying 

8.  i. Design a flash mixer for a proposed water treatment plant 

with a capacity of 25 ML/d and draw a neat sketch of the 

unit. (7) 

ii. Prepare a short note on “Break Point Chlorination”. (6) 

BT 5  Evaluating 

9.  A new township is to have a population of 6,00,000 and 90 Lpcd of 

water supply. Find the rapid sand filter unit with details of under 

drainage and water washingincluding gutter arrangement. Limit 

the maximum spent backwash water as 3.5%. 

BT 1 Remembering 

10.  What is disinfection? Identify the factors affecting disinfection? 

Examine the conventional and modern methods which are used to 

disinfect water. 

BT 6  Creating PART C 

1.  i Calculate how many kg of bleaching powder with 25% 

available chlorine is required daily to treat 5MLD of water 

with 3mg/L of chlorine? (6) 

ii With a neat sketch explain briefly about pulsator clarifier.(9) 

BT 3 Applying 

2.  Show the mechanism of sand filtration. Draw a neat sketch of filter 

unitsand explain its working principle. 

BT 1 Remember 

ing 

3.  Explain about the practices adopted in Residue management.  BT 4  Analyzing UNIT IV - ADVANCED WATER TREATMENT 

Water softening - Desalination -R.O plant - demineralization -adsorption -Ion exchange - Membrane 

Systems -R.O Reject management - Iron and manganese removal - Defluoridation - Construction, Operation 

& Maintenance aspects -Recent advances -MBR process 

PART – A

Q.NO  QUESTIONS  BT 

LEVEL  COMPETENCE 

1.  Define reverse osmosis.  BT 1  Remembering 

2.  Show the methods of removing temporary and permanent hardness.  BT5  Evaluating 

3.  Define Zeolite process.  BT 1  Remembering 

4.  What is meant by adsorption isotherm?  BT 1  Remembering 

5.  List any four effects of hardness in water  BT 1  Remembering 

6.  How do you regenerate softener?  BT 1  Remembering 

7.  Distinguish between physical adsorption and chemical adsorption  BT 2  Understanding 

8.  Differentiate between demineralization and desalination.  BT 2  Understanding 

9.  Describe about the term water softening.  BT 2  Understanding 

10.  What are the recent advances in water treatment process?  BT 2  Understanding 

11.  What is the principle of Demineralization by Ion -exchange?  BT 3  Applying 

12.  Define Defluoridation.  BT 3  Applying 

13.  Examine how to remove iron and manganese from water.  BT 3  Applying 

14.  What are Membrane Bioreactors?  BT 5  Evaluating 

15.  Define RO reject management.  BT4  Analyzing PART – B

4. i. Describe the types of hardness present in water. (5) 

ii. Discuss about the Ion exchange method of water softening 

with a sketch. (8)   

> BT 2

Understanding 

5. Explain the methods of removing temporary and permanent 

hardness from water.   

> BT 2

Understanding 

6. Explain the Zeolite process for the removal of permanent hardness 

from water.   

> BT 4

Analyzing 

7. i. Why and what pretreatment is required in the feed water to RO 

plant? (8) 

ii. Explain the techniques adopted in RO reject management. (5)  

> BT 1

Remembering 

8. Explain in detail with neat sketches about the Membrane 

Bioreactor(MBR) process.  

> BT 3

Applying 

9. Recommend the various techniques involved in defluoridation.  BT 5  Evaluating 

> PART C

1.  Explain the different methods of Water Softening.  BT 4  Analyzing 

2.  With neat sketches explain desalination by Electrodialysis method 

and RO process. 

BT 1  Remembering 

1.  Explain the various methods of removing excess Iron and 

Manganese from Ground water.   

> BT 4

Analyzing 

2.  Describe in detail about the principle and mechanism of 

desalination process.   

> BT 1

Remembering 

3.  Elaborate, how are defluoridation and demineralisation carried out 

in the advanced water treatment process.   

> BT 1

Remembering UNIT V - WATER DISTRIBUTION AND SUPPLY 

Requirements of water distribution -Components -Selection of pipe material -Service reservoirs -

Functions - Network design -Economics - -Analysis of distribution networks -Computer applications -

Appurtenances - Leak detection. Principles of design of water supply in buildings -House service connection -

Fixtures and fittings -Systems of plumbing and types of plumbing. 

> PART A

1.  What is an equivalent pipe?  BT 1  Remembering 

2.  How will you calculate the service capacity of the reservoir?  BT6  Creating 

3.  Mention the important components needed for the water distribution to 

buildings. 

BT 1  Remembering 

4.  Where the ring system of water distribution system is adopted?  BT 1  Remembering 

5.  What are the requirements of water distribution system.  BT 1  Remembering 

6.  Name the appurtenances used in water distribution system.  BT 1  Remembering 

7.  Describe about air valves. Mention the different types of air valves.  BT 2  Understanding 

8.  Extend a few lines on ferrule in water service connection.  BT 2  Understanding 

9.  Predict the factors which control water supply to buildings.  BT 2  Understanding 

10.  Discuss the methods available to find the leakages in pipelines.  BT 2  Understanding 

11.  Explain Hardy Cross method of pipe network analysis.  BT 4  Analyzing 

12.  Examine the prime functions of service reservoirs.  BT 3  Applying 

13.  What is a surface reservoir?  BT3  Applying 

14.  Analyze how to identify leakage in pipe lines.  BT 4  Analyzing 

15 . List out the components of service connection pipe.  BT5  Evaluating PART B 

1.  What are the functions of service reservoir? Briefly outline the design 

aspects of service reservoir. 

BT 1  Remembering 

2.  Draw a sketch and label the parts of a water supply service connection 

from the street main to a residential building and state the functions of 

each fitting. 

BT 1  Remembering 

3.  What is the role of computer applications in the water distribution 

system? 

BT 1  Remembering 

4.  Discuss with neat sketches the various types of layout of distribution 

system and state their advantages and disadvantages. 

BT 2  Understanding 

5.  Classify the different plumbing systems with neat sketches. Also compare 

them for their cost, efficiency, easiness, etc. 

BT 4  Analyzing 

6.  Discuss in detail about 

i. Waste water detection method.(7) 

ii. Various pipe fitting with neat sketches.(6) 

BT 2  Understanding 

7.  Explain with neat sketches about the appurtenances, fixtures and fittings 

in water distribution system. 

BT 4  Analyzing 

8.  Summarize few lines about leak detection and explain its methods. How 

to maintain the drinking water pipe line system. 

BT 6  Creating 

9.  Discuss Hardy -cross method and Equivalent pipe method to analyse 

complex pipe network. 

BT 2  Understanding 

> PART C

1.  Explain about the analysis of distribution networks in water distribution 

and supply to buildings. 

BT 4  Analyzing 

2.  Design the pipe network shown below and tabulate the flow values in 

each of the pipe. 

BT 6  Creating

