# EN8592 LP

Title: Microsoft Word - Lesson Plan WWE

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/LessonPlan/EN8592-LP.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 Dec 2022 11:00:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
1 of 4 

# Mohamed Sathak A.J College of Engineering, Chennai. 

DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 

LESSON PLAN 

Course/Branch : B.E Civil Engineering Total no. of hours given in syllabus: 

Subject Code : EN8592 Lecture : 45 

Subject Title : Wastewater Engineering Tutorials : 0

Year/Semester : III/VI Practical : 0

Faculty Name : M.B.Shanmuharajan TOTAL : 45 

Regulation : 2017 Credits : 03 

COURSE OBJECTIVES :

# The student should be made to: 

The objective of this course is to help students develop the ability to apply basic understanding of 

physical, chemical and biological phenomena for successful design, operation and maintenance of sewage 

treatment plants. 

COURSE OUTCOMES :

Upon completion of the course, the student should be able to: 

 Estimate sewage generation and design sewer system including sewage pumping stations. 

 Understand the characteristics and composition of sewage, self – purification of streams. 

 Perform basic design of the unit operations and processes that are used in sewage treatment. 

 Understand the standard methods for disposal of sewage. 

 Gain knowledge on sludge treatment and disposal. 

PREREQUISTE : 

Basic knowledge in Engineering Chemistry and Water supply engineering 

> FORMAT NO: LP 01
> ISSUE NO: 1
> ISSUE DATE: 01.07.2019

2 of 4 

Sl.No. Topic No. of 

Periods 

Text / 

Reference 

Books 

Page No. Method 

UNIT I PLANNING AND DESIGN OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM 9

Objective: 

The objectives of this course is to help students develop the ability to apply basic 

understanding of physical, chemical, and biological phenomena for successful design, operation and 

maintenance of sewage treatment plants. 

1 Characteristics and composition 

of sewage 1 T1 1, 225 Chalk and Board 

2 Population equivalent -Sanitary 

sewage flow estimation 1 T1 1 - 7 Chalk and Board 

3 Sewer materials – Hydraulics of 

flow in sanitary sewers 1 T1 

219, 11, 

24, 28 -

30 

Chalk and Board 

4 Sewer design 1 T1 225 - 230 Chalk and Board 

5 Storm drainage - Storm runoff 

estimation 2 T1 24 Chalk and Board 

6 Sewer appurtenances – corrosion 

in sewers 1 T1 73 - 81 Chalk and Board 

7 Prevention and control – sewage 

pumping-drainage in buildings 1 T3 165 – 179, 

583 Chalk and Board 

8 Plumbing systems for drainage -

Rain Watering 1 T3 580 – 583 Chalk and Board 

UNIT II PRIMARY TREATMENT OF SEWAGE 9

9 Objectives – Unit Operations and 

Processes 1 T3 256 – 274 Chalk and Board 

10 Selection of treatment processes 

– Onsite sanitation 1 T1 230 Chalk and Board 

11 Septic tank- Grey water 

harvesting 1 T1 390 Chalk and Board 

12 

Primary treatment – Principles, 

functions and design of sewage 

treatment units 

2 T1 395 Chalk and Board 

13 Screens - grit chamber 2 T1 235 – 242, 

249 Chalk and Board 

14 Primary sedimentation tanks 1 T3 306 Chalk and Board 

15 Construction, Operation and 

Maintenance aspects. 1 T3 136 Chalk and Board 

UNIT III SECONDARY TREATMENT OF SEWAGE 9

16 Objectives – Selection of 1 T1 278 Chalk and Board 3 of 4 

Treatment Methods 

17 Principles, Functions, -

Activated Sludge Process 1 T1 346 Chalk and Board 

18 Extended aeration systems 1 T1 386 Chalk and Board 

19 Trickling filters 1 T3 337 Chalk and Board 

20 Sequencing Batch Reactor(SBR) 1 - - PPT 

21 Membrane 

Bioreactor - UASB 1 T1 416 Chalk and Board 

22 Waste Stabilization Ponds 1 T3 457 Chalk and Board 

23 

Other treatment methods -

Reclamation and 

Reuse of sewage 

1 T1 188 Chalk and Board 

24 

Recent Advances in Sewage 

Treatment – Construction, 

Operation and 

Maintenance aspects. 

1 T1 427 – 440 Chalk and Board 

UNIT IV DISPOSAL OF SEWAGE 9

25 Standards for Disposal 1 T3 225 Chalk and Board 

26 Methods – dilution 1 T3 224 Chalk and Board 

27 Mass balance principle 1 - - PPT 

28 Self purification of river 1 T3 229 Chalk and Board 

29 Oxygen sag curve 1 T3 229 Chalk and Board 

30 Deoxygenation and reaeration 1 T3 229, 230 Chalk and Board 

31 Streeter–Phelps model 1 T3 230 Chalk and Board 

32 Land disposal – 

Sewage farming 1 T3 248 Chalk and Board 

33 Sodium hazards - Soil dispersion 

system. 1 - - PPT 

UNIT V SLUDGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 9

34 Objectives - Sludge 

characterization 1 T3 478 Chalk and Board 

35 Thickening 1 T3 487 Chalk and Board 

36 Design of gravity thickener 1 T3 490 Chalk and Board 

37 Sludge digestion 1 T3 491 Chalk and Board 4 of 4 

38 Standard rate and High rate 

digester design 1 T3 501 Chalk and Board 

39 Biogas recovery – Sludge 

Conditioning and Dewatering 2 T3 505 – 508 Chalk and Board 

40 Sludge drying beds- ultimate 

residue disposal 1 T3 506 – 510 Chalk and Board 

41 Recent advances 1 - - PPT 

Assignment / Case Studies / Tutorials /Quiz / Mini Projects / Model Development / Task 

1. Problems on sewer design 

2. Problems on septic tank. 

3. Describe about Activated sludge process. 

TEXT BOOK 

 Garg, S.K., Environmental Engineering Vol. II, Khanna 

Publishers,New Delhi, 2015. 

 Duggal K.N., “Elements of Environmental Engineering” S.Chand and 

Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 2014. 

 Punmia,B.C.,Jain, A.K.,andJain.A.K.., Environmental Engineering, 

Vol.II, Laxmi Publications, 2010. 

REFERENCES: 

 Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems Part A,B and C, 

CPHEEO, Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India, 

New Delhi, 2013. 

 Metcalf and Eddy- Wastewater Engineering–Treatment and Reuse, 

Tata Mc.Graw-Hill Company, New Delhi, 2010. 

 Syed R. Qasim “Wastewater Treatment Plants”, CRC Press, 

Washington D.C.,2010 

 Gray N.F, “Water Technology”, Elsevier India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 

2006. 

PREPARED BY REVIEWED BY APPROVED BY 

Signature 

Name M.B.Shanmuharajan 

Date

