
# DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND HUMANITIES

# Physics &#x26; Chemistry Laboratory

# BS8161 (ODD Semester)

# Regulations: R17

# LIST OF EXPERIMENTS:

# PHYSICS LABORATORY (Any 5 Experiments)

1. Determination of rigidity modulus – Torsion pendulum
2. Determination of Young’s modulus by non-uniform bending method
3. (a) Determination of wavelength, and particle size using Laser

(b) Determination of acceptance angle in an optical fiber.
4. Determination of thermal conductivity of a bad conductor – Lee’s Disc method.
5. Determination of velocity of sound and compressibility of liquid – Ultrasonic interferometer
6. Determination of wavelength of mercury spectrum – spectrometer grating
7. Determination of band gap of a semiconductor
8. Determination of thickness of a thin wire – Air wedge method

# CHEMISTRY LABORATORY: (Any seven experiments to be conducted)

1. Estimation of HCl using Na₂CO₃ as primary standard and Determination of alkalinity in water sample.
2. Determination of total, temporary &#x26; permanent hardness of water by EDTA method.
3. Determination of DO content of water sample by Winkler’s method.
4. Determination of chloride content of water sample by argentometric method.
5. Estimation of copper content of the given solution by Iodometry.
6. Determination of strength of given hydrochloric acid using pH meter.
7. Determination of strength of acids in a mixture of acids using conductivity meter.
8. Estimation of iron content of the given solution using potentiometer.
9. Estimation of iron content of the water sample using spectrophotometer (1, 10-Phenanthroline / thiocyanate method).
10. Estimation of sodium and potassium present in water using flame photometer.
11. Determination of molecular weight of polyvinyl alcohol using Ostwald viscometer.
12. Pseudo first order kinetics - ester hydrolysis.
13. Corrosion experiment - weight loss method.
14. Determination of CMC.
15. Phase change in a solid.
16. Conductometric titration of strong acid vs strong base.

# EXPERIMENT BEYOND THE ANNA UNIVERSITY SYLLABUS

1. Determination of Young’s modulus by uniform bending method.
2. Determination of the refractive index of the prism - spectrometer.
3. Determination of the semiconductor diode.

Estd - 2001