# CS8582

Title: CS8582.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/images/departments/it/CS8582.pdf

Published Time: 2020-07-31T09:42:47.000Z

Number of Pages: 2

Markdown Content:
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 

# Name of the Lab  : OBJECT ORIENTED ANALYSIS AND DESIGN LABORATORY 

# CS8582 (EVEN Semester) Regulations: R17 

List of experiments recommended as per Anna University 

Draw standard UML diagrams using an UML modeling tool for a given case study and map design to code and implement a 3 layered architecture. Test the developed code and validate whether the SRS is satisfied. 

1.  Identify a software system that needs to be developed. 

2.  Document the Software Requirements Specification (SRS) for the identified system. 

3.  Identify use cases and develop the Use Case model. 

4.  Identify the conceptual classes and deve lop a Domain Model and also derive a Class Diagram from that. 

5.  Using the identified scenarios, find the interaction between objects and represent them using UML 

Sequence and Collaboration Diagrams 

6.  Draw relevant State Chart and Activity Diagrams for the same  system. 

7.  Implement the system as per the detailed design 

8.  Test the software system for all the scenarios identified as per the usecase diagram 

9.  Improve the reusability and maintainability of the software system by applying appropriate design 

patterns. 

10.  Implem ent the modified system and test it for various scenarios 

SUGGESTED DOMAINS FOR MINI-PROJECT: 

1.  Passport automation system. 

2.  Book bank 

3.  Exam registration 

4.  Stock maintenance system. 

5.  Online course reservation system 

6.  Airline/Railway reservation system 

7.  Software  personnel management system 

8.  Credit card processing 

9.  E-book management system. 

10.  Recruitment System 

11.  Foreign trading system 

12.  Conference management system 

13.  BPO management system 

14.  Library management system 

15.  Student information system 

List of experiments beyond the  Anna University 

1. Hotel Management system 

2. Online Quiz competition

