# EE8261 E

Title: EE8261-E.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/images/departments/eee/Lab/EE8261-E.pdf

Published Time: 2020-08-01T06:48:03.000Z

Number of Pages: 1

Markdown Content:
Name of the Lab: Electronics Laboratory 

# EE8261 (Even Semester) Regulation: R2017 Dept: EEE/II Sem 

EE 8261-Electric Circuits Laboratory 

1. Simulation and experimental verification of electrical circuit problems 

usingKirchhoff’s voltage and currentlaws. 

2. Simulation and experimental verification of electrical circuit problems using 

Thevenin’s theorem. 

3. Simulation and experimental verification of electrical circuit problems using 

Norton’s t heorem. 

4. Simulation and experimental verification of electrical circuit problems using Superposition theorem. 

5. Simulation and experimental verification of Maximum Power transferTheorem. 

6. Study of Analog and digital oscilloscopes and measurement of sinusoidal voltage, frequency and powerfactor. 

7. Simulation and Experimental validation of R-C electric circuittransients. 

8. Simulation and Experimental validation of frequency response of RLC electriccircuit. 

9. Design and Simulation of series resonancecircuit. 

10. Design and Simulation of parallel resonantcircuits. 

11. Simulation of three phase balanced and unbalanced star, delta networkscircuits. 

Content Beyond the Syllabus 

.

EE 8261-Electric Circuits Laboratory 

1. Simulation and Verification of Ohms law. 

2. Simulation and Verification of Reciprocity Theorem. 

3.Experimental determination of power in three phase circuits by two-watt meter .method. 

4. Determination of two port network parameters.

