# ME R 2017

Title: ME-R-2017.pdf

URL Source: https://www.msajce-edu.in/academics/civil/nba/syllabus/ME-R-2017.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 16 Feb 2022 12:22:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
# 1

# ANNA UNIVERSITY : : CHENNAI - 600 025 

# AFFILIATED INSTITUTIONS 

# REGUL ATIONS 2017 

# CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 

# COMMON TO ALL POST GRADUATE PROGRAMMES 

The following Regulations is applicable to the students admitted to M.E / M.Tech., M. C.A and M.B.A. 

Programmes at all Engineering Colleges affiliated to Anna University, Chennai (other than 

Autonomous Colleges) and to all the University Colleges of Engineering of Anna University, Chennai 

from the academic year 201 7-201 8.

1 PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS AND NOMENCLATURE 

In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires: 

i. “Programme ” means Post graduate Degree Programme e.g. M.E., M.Tech. Degree 

Programme. 

ii. “Branch ” means specialization or discipline of M.E. / M.Tech. Degre e Programme like 

“Structural Engineering”, “Engineering Design”, etc.  

> iii.

“Course ” means Theory or Practical subject that is normally studied in a semester, like 

Applied Mathematics, Advanced Thermodynamics, etc. 

iv. “Director, Academic Courses” mea ns the authority of the University who is responsible 

for all academic activities of the University for implementation of relevant Rules and 

Regulations. 

v. “Chairman” means the Head of the Faculty. 

vi. “Head of the Department” means Head of the Depar tment concerned. 

vii. “Head of the Institution ” means the Principal of a College / Institution who is 

responsible for all academic activities of that College / Institution and for 

implementation of relevant Rules and Regulations. 

viii. “Controller of Exa minations” means the Authority of the University who is responsible 

for all activities of the University Examinations. 

ix. “University ” means ANNA UNIVERSITY, CHENNAI. 2

2 PROGRAMMES OFFERED, MODES OF STUDY AND ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 P.G. PROGRAM MES OFFERED :

1. M.E 

2. M.Tech. 

3. M.B.A. 

4. M.C.A. 

2.2 MODES OF STUDY: 

2.2.1 Full -Time: 

Candidates admitted under ‘Full -Time’ should be available in the College / Institution during 

the entire duration of working hours (From Morning to Evening on Full -Time basis) for the 

curricular, co -curricular and extra -curricular activities assigned to them. 

The Full -Time candidates should not attend any other Full -Time programme(s) / course(s) or 

take up any Full -Time job / Part -Time job in any Institution or Company during the period of the 

Full -Time programme. Violation of the above rules will result in cancellation of admission to the 

PG programme. 

2.2.2 Part -Time Mode: 

In this mode of study, the students are required to attend classes conducted in t he evenings 

and complete the course in three years. 

2.2. 3 Conversion from one mode of study to the other is not permitted. 

2.3 ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS: 

2.3.1 Candidates for admission to the first semester of the Post -Graduate Degree Programme shal l

be required to have passed an appropriate Under -Graduate Degree Examination of Anna 

University or equivalent as specified under qualification for admission as per the Tamil Nadu 

Common Admission (TANCA) criteria. 

Note: TANCA releases the updated criter ia during the admissions every academic year. 

Admission shall be offered only to the candidates who possess the qualification prescribed 

against each programme .

Any other relevant qualification which is not prescribed against each programme shall be 

con sid ered for equivalence by the committee constituted for the purpose . Admission to such 

degrees shall be offered only after obtaining equivalence to such degrees. 

2.3.2 However, the Syndicate of the University may decide to restrict admission in any pa rticular 

year to candidates having a subset of qualifications prescribed at the time of admission. 

2.3.3 Notwithstanding the qualifying examination the candidate might have passed, he/she shall 

have a minimum level of proficiency in the appropriate progr amme / courses as prescribed by 

the Syndicate of the University from time to time. 

2.3.4 Eligibility conditions for admission such as the class obtained, the number of attempts in 

qualifying examination and physical fitness will be as prescribed by the Syndicate of the 

University from time to time. 

2.3.5 All Part -Time candidates should satisfy other conditions regarding Experience , Sponsorship 

etc. that may be prescribed by the Syndicate from time to time. 3

3 STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAMMES 

# 3.1 Categoriz ation of Courses 

# Every Post Graduate Degree Programme will have a curriculum with syllabi 

# consisting of theory and practical courses that shall be categorized as follows: 

i. Foundation Courses (FC) may include Mathematics or other basic courses 

ii. Profession al Core (PC) courses include the core courses relevant to the chosen 

specialization/branch. 

iii. Professional Elective (PE) courses include the elective courses relevant to the 

chosen specialization/ branch. 

iv. Employability Enhancement Courses (EEC) include Pro ject Work and/or 

Internship, Seminar, Professional Practices, Summer Project, Case Study and 

Industrial / Practical Training. 

# Instead of two electives in the curriculum, the student may be permitted to choose a 

# maximum of 2 courses from other PG programme s with the approval of the Head of 

# the Department offering such courses. 

3.2 Courses per Semester 

Curriculum of a semester shall normally have a blend of lecture courses and practical courses 

including Employability Enhancement Courses. Each course may have credits assigned as 

per clause 3.3. 

3.3 Credit Assignment 

Each course is assigned certain number of credits based on the following: 

Contact period per week CREDITS 

1 Lecture Period 1

2 Tutorial Periods 1

2 Practical Periods 

(Laboratory / Seminar / 

Project Work etc.) 

1

The Contact Periods per week for Tutorials and Practical can only be in multiples of 2. 

# 3.4 Project Work 

3. 4. 1 The project work for M.E. / M.Tech. Programmes consist of Phase –I and Phase –II. The 

Phase –I is to be underta ken during III semester and Phase –II, which is a continuation of 

Phase –I is to be undertaken during IV semester. 

3. 4. 2 In case of candidates of M.E. / M.Tech. Programmes not completing Phase -I of project work 

successfully, the candidates can undertake Pha se -I again in the subsequent semester. In 

such cases the candidates can enroll for Phase -II, only after successful completion of Phase -I. 

3. 4. 3 Project work shall be carried out under the supervision of a “qualified teacher” in the 

Department conce rned. In this context “qualified teacher” means the faculty member 

possessing (i) PG degree with a minimum of 3 years experience in teaching or (ii) Ph.D. 

degree. 4

3. 4. 4 A candidate may, however, in certain cases, be permitted to work on projects in an 

Industrial/Research Organization, on the recommendations of the Head of the Department 

Concerned. In such cases, the Project work shall be jointly supervised by a supervisor of the 

department and an expert, as a joint supervisor from the organization and th e student shall be 

instructed to meet the supervisor periodically and to attend the review committee meetings for 

evaluating the progress. 

3. 4. 5 The Project work (Phase II in the case of M.E/M.Tech.) shall be pursued for a minimum of 16 

weeks during the f inal semester. 

3.6 The deadline for submission of final Project Report is 60 calendar days from the last working 

day of the semester in which project / thesis / dissertation is done. However, the Phase -I of 

the Project work in the case M.E. / M.Tech. Pr ogrammes shall be submitted within a maximum 

period of 30 calendar days from the last working day of the semester as per the academic 

calendar published by the University. 

# 3.7 Industrial Training / Internship 

The students may undergo Industrial trai ning for a period as specified in the curriculum 

during summer / winter vacation. In this case the training has to be undergone continuously 

for the entire period. 

The students may undergo Internship at Research organization / University (after due 

appro val from the Department Consultative Committee) for the period prescribed in the 

curriculum during summer / winter vacation, in lieu of Industrial training. 

# 3.8 Value Added Courses 

The Students may optionally undergo Value Added Courses and the credit s earned 

through the Value Added Courses shall be over and above the total credit requirement 

prescribed in the curriculum for the award of the degree. One / Two credit courses shall be 

offered by a Department of an institution with the prior approval from the Head of the 

Institution. The details of the syllabus, time table and faculty may be sent to the Centre for 

Academic Courses and the Controller of Examinations after approval from the Head of the 

Institution concerned atleast one month before the cours e is offered. Students can take a 

maximum of two one credit courses / one two credit course during the entire duration of 

the Programme. 

3.9 Online Courses 

3.9.1 Students may be permitted to credit only one online course of 3 credits with the 

approval of Head of the Institution and Centre for Academic Courses. 

3.9.2 Students may be permitted to credit one online course (which are provided with 

certificate) subject to a maximum of three credits. The approved list of online 

courses will be provided by the Centre for Academic courses from time to time. 

The student needs to obtain certification or credit to become eligible for writing the 

End Semester Examination to be conducted by Contr oller of Examinations, Anna 

University. The details regarding online courses taken up by students should be 

sent to the Controller of Examinations, Anna University and Centre for Academic 

Courses one month before the commencement of end Semester Examination. 

3.10 Medium of Instruction 

The medium of instruction is English for all courses, examinations, seminar presentations 

and project / thesis / dissertation reports. 5

4 DURATION AND STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAM MES: 

4.1 The minimum and maximum period for completion of the P.G. Programmes are 

given below: 

Programme Min. No. of 

Semesters 

Max. No. of 

Semesters 

M.E. / M.Tech. (Full -Time) 4 8

M.E. / M.Tech. (Part Time) 6 12 

M.C.A. (Full Time) 6 12 

M.B.A. ( Full Time) 4 8

M.B.A. (Part Time) 6 12 

4.2 The Curricul um and Syllabi of all the P.G. Programmes shall be approv ed by the Academic 

Council of Anna University . The number of Credits to be earned for the successful completion 

of the programme shall be a s specified in the Curricul um of th e respective specialization of the 

P.G. Programme 

4.3 Each semester shall normally consist of 75 working days or 540 periods of each 50 minutes 

duration , for full -time mode of study or 2 50 periods for part -time mode of study. The Head of 

the Institution shall ensure that every teacher imparts instruction as per the number of periods 

specified in the syllabus and that the teacher teaches the full content of the specified syllabus 

for the course being taught. For the purpo se of calculation of attendance requirement for 

writing the end semester examinations (as per clause 9) by students, following method shall 

be used. 

Percentage of Total no. of periods attended in all the courses per semester 

Att endance = X100 

(No.of periods / week as prescribed in the curriculum) x 15 

taken together for all courses of the semester 

End Semester Exam inations conducted by the University will be scheduled after the last 

working day of the semester. 

4.4 The minimum prescribed credits required for the award of the degree shall be within the limits 

specified below: 

Programme Prescribed Credit Range 

M. E. / M.Tech. 70 to 75 

Programme Prescribed Credit Range 

M.C.A. 115 - 120 

M.B.A. 86 - 90 

5. COURSE REGISTRATION 

5.1 The Institution is responsible for registering the courses that each student is proposing to 

undergo in the ensuing semeste r. Each student has to register for all courses to be undergone 

in the curriculum of a particular semester (with the facility to drop courses to a maximum of 6 

credits ( vide clause 5.2 ). The student can also register for courses for which the student has 

failed in the earlier semesters. In such cases the student shall do reappearance registration 

for those courses for which the attendance requirement is not compulsory. However, the 

student have the option to take up some other professional elective or open elective that he has 6

failed to pass. But, the total number of credits that a student is allowed to register per 

semester cannot exceed 36. The registration details of the candidates may be approved by 

the Head of the Institution and forwarded to the Contr oller of Examinations. This registration is 

for undergoing the course as well as for writing the End Semester Examinations. No Elective 

course shall be offered by any department of any institution unless a minimum 5 students 

register for the course. Howev er, i f the students admitted in the associated Branch and 

Semester is less than 5, this minimum will not be applicable. 

The courses that a student registers in a particular semester may include 

i. Courses of the current semester. 

ii. The core (Theory/Lab /EEC) courses that the student has not cleared in the previous 

semesters. 

iii. Elective courses which the student failed (either the same elective or a different elective 

instead) 

5.2 Flexibility to Drop courses 

5.2.1 A student has to earn the total number of cre dits specified in the curriculum of the respective 

Programme of stud y in order to be eligible to obtain the degree .

5.2.2 From the II to Final semesters, the student has the option of dropping existing courses in a 

semester during registration. Total num ber of credits of such courses cannot exceed 6 for PG 

(Full Time) programmes and cannot exceed 3 for PG (Part Time) programmes. 

6 EVALUATION OF PROJECT WORK 

The evaluation of Project Work for Phase -I & Phase -II in the case of M.E. / M.Tech. and projec t

work of M.B.A and M.C.A shall be done independently in the respective semesters and marks 

shall be allotted as per the weightages given in Clause 6.1.

6.1 There shall be three assessments (each 100 marks ) during the Semester by a review 

committee. The Student shall make presentation on the progress made before the Committee. 

The Head of the Institution shall constitute the review committee for each branch of study. The 

total marks obtained in the three assessment s shall be reduced to 20 marks and rounde d to the 

nearest integer (as per the Table given below) . There will be a vice -voce Examination during 

End Semester Examinations conducted by a Committee consisting of the supervisor, one 

internal examiner and one external examiner . The internal examiner an d the external examiner 

shall be appointed by the Controller of Examination . The distribution of marks for the internal 

assessment and End semester examination is given below: 

Internal Assessment (20 

Marks) 

End Semester Examination (80 Marks) 

Review -

I

Review -

II 

Review 

- III 

Thesis 

Submission 

(30 Marks) 

Viva – Voce 

(Rounded to 50 Marks) 

External 

Examiner 

Internal 

Examiner 

External 

Examiner 

Supervisor 

Examiner 

5 7.5 7.5 30 15 20 15 7

6.2 The Project Report prepared according to approved gu idelines as given by Director, Academic 

Courses and duly signed by the supervisor(s) and the Head of the Department concerned 

shall be submitted to the Head of the Institution .

6.3 If the candidate fails to obtain 50% of the internal assessment marks in the Phase –I and 

Phase –II / final project, he/she will not be permitted to submit the report for that particular 

semester and has to re -enroll for the same in the subsequent semester. 

If a candidate fails to submit the project report on or before the speci fied deadline, he/she is 

deemed to have failed in the Project Work and shall re -enroll for the same in a subsequent 

semester. This applies to both Phase –I and Phase –II in the case of M.E. / M.Tech. Project 

Work and the Final Project work of M.B.A . / M.C.A. 

If a candidate fails in the end semester examinations of Phase –I, he /she has to resubmit the 

Project Report wit hin 30 days f rom the date of declaration of the results . If he / she fails in the 

End semester examination of Phase –II of Project work of M.E . / M.Tech. or the Final Project 

work of M .B.A. / M .C.A, he/she shall resubmit the Project Report within 60 days from the date 

of declaration of the results. The resubmission of a project report and subsequent viva -voce 

examination will be considered as reappearance with payment of exam fee . For this purpose 

the same Internal and External examiner s shall evaluate the resubmitted report. 

6.3.1 A copy of the approved Project Report after the successful completion of viva -voce 

examinations shall be kept in the library of the college / institution. 

6.3.2 Practical / Industrial Training , Summer Project if specified in the Curriculum shall not exceed 

the maximum duration of 4 weeks and should be organized by the Head of the Department for 

every student. 

6.3 .3 At t he end of Practical / Industrial Training , Summer Project the candidate shall submit a 

certificate from the organization where he/she has undergone training and also a brief report. 

The evaluation for 100 marks will be carried out internally based o n this rep ort and a Viva -

Voce Examination will be conducted by a Departmental Committee constituted by the Head of 

the Institution. Certificates submitted by the students shall be attached to the mark list sent by 

the Head of the Institution to the Control ler of Examination .

7 CLASS ADVISER 

There shall be a class advisor for each class. The class advisor will be one among the 

(course -instructors) of the class. He / She will be appointed by the H ead of the department 

concerned. The class advisor is the ex -officio member and the Convener of the class 

committee. The responsibilities for the class advisor shall be: 

 To act as the channel of communication between the HoD and the students of the respective 

class. 

 To collect and maintain various statistical det ails of students. 

 To help the chairperson of the class committee in planning and conduct of the class committee 

meetings. 

 To monitor the academic performance of the students including attendance and to inform the 

class committee. 

 To attend to the students ’ welfare activities like awards, medals, scholarships and industrial 

visits. 8

8 CLASS COMMITTEE 

8.1 A Class Committee consists of teachers of the concerned class, student representatives and a 

chairperson who is not teaching the class. It is like the ‘Quality Circle’ (more commonly used in 

industries) with the overall goal of improving the teaching -learning process. The functions of 

the class committee include :

• Solving problems experienced by students in the class room and in the laboratories .

• Clarifying the regulations of the programme and the details of rules therein .

• Informing the student representatives , the “academic schedule ” including the dates of 

assessments and the syllabus coverage for each assessment period. 

• Informing the student representatives , the details of regulations regarding the weightage 

used for each assessment. In the case of practical courses (laboratory / project work / 

seminar etc.) the breakup of marks for each experiment/ exercise/ module of work, shoul d

be clearly discussed in the class committee meeting and informed to the students. 

• Analyzing the performance of the students of the class after each test and finding the ways 

and means of improving the Students Performance 

• Identifying the weak students, if any , in any specific subject and requesting the teachers 

concerned to provide some additional help or guidance or coaching to such weak students 

as frequently as possible .

8.2 The class committee for a class under a particular programme is normally constituted by the 

Head of the Department. However, if the students of different programmes are mixed in a 

class, the class committee is to be constituted by the Head of the Institution. 

8.3 The class committee shall be constituted on the first working day of any semester or earlier. 

8.4 At least 2 student representatives (usually 1 boy and 1 girl) shall be included in the class 

committee. 

8.5 The chairperson of the class committee shall invite the Class adviser(s) and the Head of the 

Depa rtment to the meeting of the class committee. 

8.6 The Head of the Institution may participate in any class committee of the institution. 

8.7 The Chairperson of be Class Committee is required to prepare the minutes of every meeting, 

submit the same to the Head of the Institution within two days of the meeting and arrange to 

circulate among the concerned students and teachers. If there are some points in the minutes 

requiring action by the management, the same shall be brought to the notice of the 

manag ement by the Head of the Institution .

8.8 The first meeting of the class committee shall be held within one week from the date of 

commencement of the semester in order to inform the students about the nature and 

weightage of assessments within the frame work of the Regulations. Two or three subsequent 

meetings may be held at suitable intervals. During these meetings the student members, 

representing the entire class, shall meaningfully interact and express the opinions and 

suggestions of the class student s to improve the effectiveness of the teaching -learning 

process. 9

9 COURSE COMMITTEE FOR COMMON COURSES 

Each common course offered to more than one group of students shall have a “Course 

Committee” comprising all the teachers teaching the common cour se with one of them 

nominated as Course Coordinator. The nomination of the course Coordinator shall be made by 

the Head of the Department / Head of the Institution depending upon whether all the teachers 

teaching the common course belong to a single depart ment or to several departments. The 

‘Course committee’ shall meet as often as possible and ensure uniform evaluation of the tests 

and arrive at a common scheme of evaluation for the tests. Wherever it is feasible, the course 

committee may also prepare a co mmon question paper for the Assessment Test (s). 

10 ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETION OF A SEMESTER 

10 .1 A candidate who has fulfilled the following conditions shall be deemed to have satisfied the 

attendance requirements for completion of a seme ster. 

Ideally every student is expected to attend all classes and earn 100% attendance. However in 

order to allow provision for certain unavoidable reasons such as prolonged hospitalization / 

accident / specific illness the student is expected to earn a minimum of 75% attendance to 

become eligible to write the End -Semester Examination s.

Therefore , every student shall secure not less than 75% of overall attendance in that semester 

as per clause 4. 3.

10 .2 However, a candidate who secures overall attenda nce between 65% and 74% in th at current 

semester due to medical reasons ( prolonged hospitalization / accident / specific illness /

participation in sports events ) may be permitted to appear for the current semester 

examinations subject to the condition tha t the candidate shall submit the medical certificate /

sports participation certificate to the Head of the Institution. T he same shall be forwarded to 

the Controller of Examinations for record purposes .

10 .3 Candidates who could secure less than 65% over all attendance and Candidates w ho do not 

satisfy the clauses 10 .1 & 10 .2 will not be permitted to write the end -semester examination of 

that current semest er and are not permitted to go to next semester. They are required to 

repeat the incomplete semester in the next academic year. 

11 PROCEDURES FOR AWARDING MARKS FOR INTERNAL ASSESSMENT(IA) 

The maximum marks assigned to different courses shall be as given below: 

Each of the theory and practical courses (including project work) shall carry a maximum of 100 

marks of which 20 marks will be through internal assessment and the End Semester 

Examination (ESE) will carry 80 marks. 

11.1 The marks for the continuous assessment shall be awarded as per the procedure given below: 

(i) Theory Courses: 

Three tests each carrying 100 marks shall be conducted during the semester by the 

Department / College concerned. The total marks obtained in all tests put together out of 300, 

shall be proportionately reduced for 20 marks and rounded to the nearest integer (This also 

implies equal weightage to all the three tests). 

(ii) Practical Courses: 

The maximum marks for Internal Assessment shall be 20 in case of practical courses. Every 

practical exercise / experiment shall be evaluated based on conduct of experiment / exercise 

and records maintained. There shall be at least one test. The criteria for arriving at the 

Internal Assessment marks of 20 is as follows: 75 marks shall be awarded for successful 

completion of all the prescribed experiments done in the Laboratory and 25 ma rks for the test. 

The total mark shall be reduced to 20 and rounded to the nearest integer. 10 

(iii ) Theory Courses with Laboratory component: 

The maximum marks for Internal Assessment shall be 20 in case of theory courses with 

Laboratory component. Fo r a theory course with Laboratory component, there shall be three 

assessments: the first two assessments (each with a maximum of 100 marks) will be from 

theory portions and the third assessment (maximum marks 100) will be for laboratory 

component. The sum of marks of all three assessments shall be reduced to 20 marks and 

rounded to the nearest integer. 

(iv) Other Employability Enhancement Courses 

(a) The seminar / Case study is to be considered as purely INTERNAL (with 100% internal 

marks o nly). Every student is expected to present a minimum of 2 seminars per semester 

before the evaluation committee and for each seminar marks can be equally apportioned. 

The three member committee appointed by Head of the Institution will evaluate the 

seminar and at the end of the semester the marks can be consolidated and taken as the 

final mark. The evaluation shall be based on the seminar paper (40%), presentation (40%) 

and response to the questions asked during presentation (20%). 

(b) The Industrial / Pr actical Training shall carry 100 marks and shall be evaluated through 

internal assessment only. At the end of Industrial / Practical training / internship / Summer 

Project, the candidate shall submit a certificate from the organization where he / she has 

undergone training and a brief report. The evaluation will be made based on this report 

and a Viva -Voce Examination, conducted internally by a three member Departmental 

Committee constituted by the Head of the Institution. Certificates submitted by the 

cand idate shall be attached to the mark list sent by the Head of the Department. 

11.2 Assessment for Value Added Course 

The one / two credit course shall carry 100 marks and shall be evaluated through continuous 

assessments only . Two Assessments shall be co nducted during the semester by the Department 

concerned. The total marks obtained in the tests shall be reduced to 100 marks and rounded to 

the nearest integer. A committee consisting of the Head of the Department, staff handling the 

course and a senior F aculty member nominated by the Head of the Institution shall monitor the 

evaluation process. The list of students along with the marks and the grades earned may be 

forwarded to the Controller of Examinations for appropriate action at least one month befor e the 

commencement of End Semester Examinations 

11.3 Assessment for Online Courses 

Students may be permitted to credit one online course (which are provided with certificate) subject 

to a maximum of three credits. The approved list of online courses wil l be provided by the Centre 

for Academic courses from time to time. This online course of 3 credits can be considered 

instead of one elective course . The student needs to obtain certification or credit to become 

eligible for writing the End Semester Examin ation to be conducted by Anna University. The 

course shall be evaluated through the End Semester Examination only conducted by 

Controller of Examinations, Anna University. 

11.4 Internal marks approved by the Head of the Institution shall be displayed by the respective 

HODs within 5 days from the last working day. 11 

11.5 Every teacher is required to maintain an 'ATTENDANCE AND ASSESSMENT RECORD' 

which consists of attendance marked in each lecture or practical or project work class, the test 

marks and th e record of class work (topics covered), separately for each course. This should 

be submitted to the Head of the Department periodically (at least three times in a semester) for 

checking the syllabus coverage and the records of test marks and attendance. T he Head of 

the department will put his signature and date after due verification. At the end the semester, 

the record should be verified by the Head of the institution who will keep this document in safe 

custody (for five years). The university or any insp ection team appointed by the University may 

inspect the records of attendance and assessments of both current and previous semesters. 

12 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPEARING FOR SEMESTER EXAMINATION 

12.1 A candidate shall normally be permitted to appear for t he University examination s of the 

current semester if he/she has satisfied the semester completion requirements as per clause 

10 .1 & 10 .2 and has registered for examination in all courses of the current semester. 

12.2 Further, r egistration is mandator y for all the courses in the current semester as well as for 

arrear(s) course(s) for the university examinations failing which , the candidate will not be 

permitted to move to the higher semester. 

12.3 A student who has passed all the courses prescribed in the curriculum for the award of the 

degree shall not be permitted to re -enroll to improve his/her marks in a course or the 

aggregate marks / CGPA. 

13 UNIVERSITY EXAMINATIONS 

13.1 There shall be an End - Semester Examination of 3 hours duration in ea ch lecture based 

course. 

The examinations shall ordinarily be conducted between October and December during the 

odd semesters and between April and June in the even semesters. 

For the practical examinations (including project work), both internal and e xternal examiners 

shall be appointed by the University. 

13.2 WEIGHTAGE 

The following will be the weightage for different courses. 

i) Lecture or Lecture cum Tutorial based course: 

Internal Assessment - 20% 

End Semester Examination - 80% 

ii) Laboratory based courses 

Internal Assessment - 20% 

End Semester Examination - 80% 

iii) Project work 

Internal Assessment - 20% 

Evaluation of Project Report 

by external examiner - 30% 

Viva -Voce Examination - 50% 

iv) Practica l training / summer project / seminar 

Internal Assessment - 100% 12 

14 PASSING REQUIREMENTS 

14.1 A candidate who secures not less than 50% of total marks prescribed for the course with a 

minimum of 50% of the marks prescribed for each of the course of the End -Semester 

University Examination in both theory and practical courses shall be declared to have passed 

in the course and acquired the relevant number of credits .

14.2 If a student fails to secure a pass in a theory course (except electives), the student shall do 

reappearance registration only along with regular students for that course in the 

subsequent semester, when offered next, earn continuous assessment marks and attend the 

end semester examination. 

14.3 If the course, in which the student has failed, is a professional elective or an open elective, 

the student may be permitted to register for the same course , earn continuous assessment 

marks and attend the End Semester Examination or any other professional elective or open 

elective c ourse in the subsequent semesters, attend the classes and fulfill the attendance 

requirements as per Clause 10 .

14.4 If a student fails to secure a pass in a laboratory course, the student shall register for the 

course again, when offered next. 

14. 5 If a student fails to secure a pass in project work even after availing clause (6.3), the 

student shall register for the course again, when offered next. 

14.6 The passing requirement for the courses which are assessed only through purely internal 

assessment (EEC courses except project work), is 50% of the internal assessment marks 

only. 

14.7 If a student has failed in the final semester examination he/ she may be allowed to register 

for the course in the next semester itself. 

14.8 A stude nt can apply for revaluation of the student’s semester examination answer paper in 

a theory course, within 2 weeks from the declaration of results, on payment of a prescribed 

fee along with prescribed application to the COE through the Head of the Institut ion. The 

COE will arrange for the revaluation and the results will be intimated to the s t u d e n t 

concerned through the Head of the Institution. Revaluation is not permitted for laboratory 

course and project work. 

15 AWARD OF LETTER GRADES 

15.1 All as sessments of a course will be evaluated on absolute marks basis. However, for the 

purpose of reporting the performance of a candidate, letter grades, each carrying certain 

number of points, will be awarded as per the range of total marks (out of 100) obtai ned by the 

candidate in each subject as detailed below: 13                             

> Letter Grade Grade Points Marks Range
> O(Outstanding) 10 91 -100
> A + (Excellent) 981 -90
> A(Very Good) 871 –80
> B + (Good) 761 –70
> B(Average )650 -60
> RA 0<50
> SA (Shortage of
> Attendance)
> 0
> W0

A student is deemed to have passed and acquired the corresponding credits in a particular 

course if he/she obtains any one of the following grades: “O”, “A+”, “A”, “B+”,“B”. 

‘SA’ denotes shortage of attendance (as per clause 10 .3) and hence prevention 

from writing the end semester examinations. ‘SA’ will appear only in the result 

sheet. 

“RA” denotes that the student has failed to pass in that course. “ W” denotes withdrawal from 

the exam for the particular course. The grades RA and W will figure both in Marks Sheet as 

well as in Result Sheet). In both cases the student has to earn Continuous Assessment marks 

and appear for the End Semester Examinations. 

If the grade W is given to course, the attendance requirement need not be satisfied. 

If the grade RA is given to a core theory course , the attendance requirement need not be 

satisfied, but if the grade RA is given to a Laboratory Course/ Project work / S eminar and 

any other EEC course, the attendance requirements (vide clause 10) should be satisfied. 

15.2 The grades O, A+, A, B+, B obtained for the one credit course shall figure in the Mark sheet 

under the title ‘Value Added Courses’ . The Courses for wh ich the grades are RA, SA will not 

figure in the mark sheet. 

15.3 GRADE SHEET 

After results are declared, Grade Sheets will be issued to each student 

which will contain the following details: 

 The college in which the candidate has studied. 

 The list o f courses enrolled during the semester and the grades scored. 

 The Grade Point Average (GPA) for the semester and 

 The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) of all courses enrolled from first 

semester onwards. 

GPA for a semester is the ratio of the sum of the products of the number of credits for courses 

acquired and the corresponding points to the sum of the number of credits for the courses 

acquired in the semester. CGPA will be calculated in a similar manner, considering all the 

courses registered from first semester. RA grades will be excluded for calculating GPA and 

CGPA. 14 

n

∑ Ci GP i

i=1 

GPA / CGPA = --------------------

n

∑ Ci

i=1 

where 

Ci is the number of c redits assigned to the course 

GP i is the Grade point corresponding to the grade obtained for each Course 

n is number of all Courses successfully cleared during the particular semester in the case of 

GPA and during all the semesters in the case of CGPA .

16 ELIGIBILITY FOR THE AWARD OF THE DEGREE 

16.1 A student shall be declared to be eligible for the award of the PG Degree (M.E./ M.Tech., 

M.C.A., M.B.A.) provided the student has 

i. Successfully gained the required number of total credits as specified in the curriculum 

corresponding to the student ’s programme within the stipulated time. 

ii. a. M.E./ M.Tech., M.B.A.(Full Time) 

Successfully completed the course requirements, appeared for the End -Semester 

examinations and passed all the subjects prescribed in all the 4 semesters within a 

maximum period of 4 years reckoned from the commencement of the first semester to 

which the candidate was admitted. 

b. M.E./ M.Tech., M.B.A.(Part Time) and M.C.A.(Full Time) 

Successfully completed the course requirements, appeared for the End -Semester 

examinations and passed all the subjects prescribed in all the 6 semesters within a 

maximum period of 6 years reckoned from the commencement of the first semester to 

which the candidate was admitted. 

iii. Successfully passed any additional courses prescribed by the Director, Academic 

Courses whenever readmitted under regulations other than 

R-2017 (vide clause 19.3 )

iv. No disciplinary action pending against the student. 

v. The award of Degree must have been approved by the Syndicate of the University. 

17 CLASSIFICATION OF THE DEGREE AWARDED 

17.1 FIRST CLASS WITH DISTINCTION: 

A Student who satisfies the following conditions shall be declared to have passed the 

examination in First class with Distinction :

M.E. / M.Tech. M.B.A.(Full Time) 

 Should have passed the examination in all the courses of all the four semesters in 

the student’s First Appearance within three years, which includes authorised break of 

study of one year (if availed) . Withdrawal from examination (vide Clause 1 8) will not 

be considered as an appe arance. 

 Should have secured a CG PA of not less than 8.50. 

 Should NO T have been prevented from writing end Semester examination due to lack 

of attendance in any of the courses. 15 

M.E. / M.Tech. M.B.A.(Part Time) and M.C.A (Full Time) 

 Should have passed th e examination in all the courses of all the six semesters in 

the student’s First Appearance within four years, which includes authorised break of 

study of one year (if availed) . Withdrawal from examination (vide Clause 1 8) will not 

be considered as an appe arance. 

 Should have secured a CG PA of not less than 8.50. 

 Should NO T have been prevented from writing end Semester examination due to lack 

of attendance in any of the courses. 

17.2 FIRST CLASS: 

A student who satisfies the following condition s shall be declared to have passed the 

examination in First class :

M.E. / M.Tech. M.B.A.( Full Time )

 Should have passed the examination in all the courses of all four semesters within 

three years , which includes one year of authorized break of study (if availed) or 

prevention from writing the End Semester Examination due to lack of attendance (if 

applicable). 

 Should have secured a CG PA of not less than 7.00 

M.E. / M.Tech. M.B.A. (Part Time ) and M.C.A (Full Time) 

 Should have passed the examination in all the courses of all six semesters within 

four years , which includes one year of authorized break of study (if availed) or 

prevention from writing the End Semester Examination due to lack of attendance (if 

applicable). 

 Should have secured a CG PA of not less than 7.00 

17.3 SECOND CLASS: 

All other student s (not covered in clauses 17.1 and 17.2) who qualify for the 

award of the degree (vide Clause 16.1 ) shall be declared to have passed the 

examination in Second Class .

17.4 A student who is absent in End Semester Examination in a course / project work after having 

registered for the same shall be considered to have appeared in that examination (except 

approved withdrawal from end semester examinations as per clause 1 8) for the purpose of 

classification. 

17.5 Photocopy / Revaluation 

A candidate can apply for photocopy of his/her semester examination answer paper in a 

theory course, within 2 weeks from the declaration of results, on payment of a prescribed fee 

through proper application to the Controller of Examinations through the Head of Institutions .

The answer script is to be valued and justified by a faculty member, who handled the subject 

and recommend for revaluation with breakup of marks for each question. Based on the 

recommendatio n, the candidate can register for the revaluation through proper application to 

the Controller of Examinations. The Controller of Examination s will arrange for the revaluation 

and the results will be intimated to the candidate concerned through the Head of the 

Institutions. Revaluation is not permitted for practical courses and for project work. 

A candidate can apply for revaluation of answer scripts for not exceeding 5 subjects at a time. 16 

17.6 Review 

Candidates not satisfied with Revaluation can apply for Review of his/ her examination 

answer paper in a theory course, within the prescribed date on payment of a prescribed fee 

through proper application to Controller of Examination through the Head of the Institution. 

Candidates applying for Revalua tion only are eligible to apply for Review. 

18 PROVISION FOR WITHDRAWAL FROM EXAMINATION: 

18.1 A studen t ma y, for valid reasons, (medically unfit / unexpected family situations / 

sports approved by Chairman, sports board and HOD) be granted permission to withdraw 

from appearing for the end semester examination in any course or courses in ANY ONE of the 

semester examinations during the entire duration of the degree programme. The application 

shall be sent to Director, Student Affairs through t he Head of the Institutions with required 

documents. 

18.2 Withdrawal application is valid if the student is otherwise eligible to write the examination 

(Clause 10 ) and if it is made within TEN days prior to the commencement of the examination 

in that cou rse or courses and recommended by the Head of the Institution and 

approved by the Controller of Examinations. 

18 .2.1 Notwithstanding the requirement of mandatory 10 days notice, applications for withdrawal for 

special cases under extraordinary conditi ons will be considered on the merit of the case. 

18.3 In case of withdrawal from a course / courses (Clause 1 2) the course will figure both in Marks 

Sheet as well as in Result Sheet. Withdrawal essentially requires the student to register 

for the course/ courses The student has to register for the course, fulfill the attendance 

requirements (vide clause 10 ), earn continuous assessment marks and attend the end 

semester examination. However, withdrawal shall not be construed as an appearance for the 

eligibil ity of a candidate for First Class with Distinction. 

18.4 Withdrawal is permitted for the end semester examinations in the final semester only if the 

period of study the student concerned does not exceed 3 years as per clause 1 7.1. 

19 AUTHORIZED BR EAK OF STUDY FROM A PROGRAMME 

19.1 A student is permitted to go on break of study for a maximum period of one year as a single 

spell. 

19.2 Break of Study shall be granted only once for valid reasons for a maximum of one year during 

the entire period of study of the degree programme. However, in extraordinary situation the 

candidate may apply for additional break of study not exceeding another one year by paying 

prescribed fee for break of study. If a candidate intends to temporarily discontinue the 

pr ogramme in the middle of the semester for valid reasons, and to rejoin the programme in a 

subsequent year, permission may be granted based on the merits of the case provided he / 

she applies to the Director, Student Affairs in advance, but not later than t he last date for 

registering for the end semester examination of the semester in question, through the Head of 

the Institution stating the reasons therefore and the probable date of rejoining the programme. 

19.3 The candidates permitted to rejoin the programme after break of study / prevention due to lack 

of attendance, shall be governed by the Curriculum and Regulations in force at the time of 

rejoining. The students rejoining in new Regulations shall apply to the Director, Academic 

Courses in the prescribed format through Head of the Institution at the beginning of the 

readmitted semester itself for prescribing additional courses, if any, from any semester of the 

regulations in -force, so as to bridge the curriculum in -force and the old curriculum. 17 

19.4 The authorized break of study would not be counted towards the duration specified for passing 

all the courses for the purpose of classification (vide Clause 17.1). 

19.5 The total period for completion of the Programme reckoned from, the commence ment of the 

first semester to which the candidate was admitted shall not exceed the maximum period 

specified in clause 4.1 irrespective of the period of break of study in order that he/she may be 

eligible for the award of the degree. 

19.6 If any student is prevented for want of required attendance, the period of prevention shall not 

be considered as authorized ‘Break of Study’ (Clause 19.1) 

20 DISCIPLINE 

21 .1 Every student is required to observe disciplined and decorous behavior both inside and out side 

the college and not to indulge in any activity which will tend to bring down the prestige of the 

University / College. The Head of Institution shall constitute a disciplinary committee consisting 

of Head of Institution, Two Heads of Department of whic h one should be from the faculty of the 

student, to enquire into acts of indiscipline and notify the University about the disciplinary action 

recommended for approval. In case of any serious disciplinary action which leads to 

suspension or dismissal, then a committee shall be constituted including one representative 

from Anna University, Chennai. In this regard, the member will be nominated by the University 

on getting information from the Head of the Institution. 

21 .2 If a student indulges in malpractice in any of the University / internal examination he / she shall 

be liable for punitive action as prescribed by the University from time to time. 

22 REVISION OF REGULATIONS, CURRICULUM AND SYLLABI 

The Universit y may from time to time revise, amend or change the Regulations, Curriculum, 

Syllabus and scheme of examinations through the Academic Council with the approval of 

Syndicate. 

- - - - - -1

ANNA UNIVERSITY, CHENNAI 

AFFLIATED INSTITUTIONS 

REGULATIONS – 201 7

CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 

M. E. STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING 

PROGRAMME EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEOs) :

I. To prepare students to excel in research and to succeed in Structural engineering 

profes sion through global, rigorous post graduate education 

II. To provide students with a solid foundation in mathematical, scientific and 

engineering fundamentals required to solve structural engineering problems 

III. To train students with good scientific and engineer ing knowledge so as to 

comprehend, analyze, design, and create novel products and solutions for the real 

life problems 

IV. To inculcate students in professional and ethical attitude, effective communication 

skills, teamwork skills, multidisciplinary approach, and an ability to relate structural 

engineering issues to broader social context. 

V. To provide student with an academic environment aware of excellence, leadership, 

written ethical codes and guidelines, and the life -long learning needed for a

successful prof essional career 

PROGRAMME OUTCOMES (POs): 

On successful completion of the programme, 

1. Graduates will demonstrate knowledge of mathematics, science and engineering. 

2. Graduates will demonstrate an ability to identify, formulate and solve engineering 

proble ms. 

3. Graduate will demonstrate an ability to design and conduct experiments, analyze and 

interpret data. 

4. Graduates will demonstrate an ability to design a system, component or process as 

per needs and specifications. 

5. Graduates will demonstrate an ability to visualize and work on laboratory and 

multidisciplinary tasks. 

6. Graduate will demonstrate skills to use modern engineering tools, software and 

equipment to analyze problems. 

7. Graduates will demonstrate knowledge of professional and ethical responsibiliti es. 

8. Graduate will be able to communicate effectively in both verbal and written form. 

9. Graduate will show the understanding of impact of engineering solutions on the 

society and also will be aware of contemporary issues. 

10. Graduate will develop confidence fo r self education and ability for life -long learning. 2

Programme 

Educational 

Objectives 

Programme Outcomes 

PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 

I   

II   

III    

IV   

V    3

PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 

> YEAR 1

SEM 1 

Advanced Mathematical Methods 

Advanced Concrete Structure s  

Dynamics of Structures    

Theory of Elasticity and Plasticity  

Profes sional Elective I

Professional Elective II 

SEM 2 

Advanced Steel Structures   

Stability of Structures   

Earthquake Analysis and Design of Structures  

Experimental Techniques     

Finite Element Analysi s of Structures   

Professional Elective III 

Professional Elective I V

Advanced Structural Engineering Laborator y    

Practical Training I (2 weeks)    

> YEAR 2

SEM 1 

Earthquake Analysis and Design of Structures 

Professional Elective V

Professional Elective VI 

Practical Training II (2 weeks)    

Seminar 

Project Work (Phase I)    

SEM 2 Project Work (Phase II)    

Practical T raining III (2 weeks)    4

Professional Electives (PE) 

Course Name PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 

Maintenance and Rehabilitation of Structures   

Prefabricated Structures     

Offshore Structures  

Analysis and Design of Tall Buildings      

Theory of Plates  

Matrix Methods for Structural Analysis  

Mechanics of Composite Materials   

Industrial Structures  

Pre -stressed Concrete     

Wind and Cyclone Effects on Structures     

Nonlinear Analysis Structures 

Design of Sub Structures      

Optimization of Structures  

Design of Steel Concrete Composite Structures  

Design of Bridges   

Design of Shell and Spatial Structures  

Computer Aided Analysis and Design      5

ANNA UNIVERSITY, CHENNAI 

AFFLIATED INSTITUTIONS 

M.E. STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING 

REGULATIONS – 2017 

CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 

CURRICULA AND SYLLABI 

SEMESTER I 

S.No. COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

THEORY 

1. MA 5151 Advanced 

Mathematical 

Methods 

FC 4 4 0 0 4

2. ST 5101 Advanced Concrete 

Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

3. ST 5102 Dynamics of Structures PC 3 3 0 0 3

4. ST 5103 Theory of Elasticity and 

Plasticity 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

5. Prof essional Elective I PE 3 3 0 0 3

6. Professional Elective I I PE 3 3 0 0 3

TOTAL 19 19 0 0 19 

SEMESTER II 

S.No. COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

THEORY 

1. ST 5201 Advanced Steel 

Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

2. ST 5202 Stability of Structures PC 3 3 0 0 3

3. ST 5203 Experimental 

Techniques 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

4. ST 5204 Finite Element Analysis 

of Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

5. Professional Elective III PE 3 3 0 0 3

6. Professional Elective I V PE 3 3 0 0 3

PRACTICAL 

7. ST 5211 Advanced Structural 

Engineering Laboratory 

PC 4 0 0 4 2

8. ST 5212 Practical Training I

(2 weeks) 

EEC 0 0 0 0 1

TOTAL 22 18 0 4 21 6

SEMESTER III 

S.N o. COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

THEORY 

1. ST 5301 Earthquake Analysis 

and Design of 

Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

2. Professional Elective V PE 3 3 0 0 3

3. Professional Elective VI PE 3 3 0 0 3

PRACTICAL 

4. ST 5311 Practical Training II 

(2 weeks) 

EEC 0 0 0 0 1

5. ST 5312 Seminar EEC 2 0 0 2 1

6. ST 5313 Project Work (Phase I) EEC 12 0 0 12 6

TOTAL 23 9 0 14 17 

SEMESTER IV 

S.No. COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

PRACTICAL 

1. ST 5411 Practical Training III 

(2 weeks) 

EEC 0 0 0 0 1

2. ST 5412 Project Work 

(Phase II) 

EEC 24 0 0 24 12 

TOTAL 24 0 0 24 13 

TOTAL NO. OF CREDITS: 70 7

FOUNDATION COURSES (FC) 

S.No . COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

1. MA 5151 Advanced 

Mathematical 

Methods 

FC 4 4 0 0 4

PROFESSIONAL CORE (PC) 

S.No . COUR SE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

1. ST 5101 Advanced Concrete 

Structure s

PC 3 3 0 0 3

2. ST 5102 Dynamics of 

Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

3. ST 5103 Theory of Elasticity 

and Plasticity 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

4. ST 5201 Advanced Steel 

Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

5. ST 5202 Stability of Structures PC 3 3 0 0 3

6. ST 5203 Experimental 

Techniques 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

7. ST 5204 Finite Element 

An alysi s of Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

8. ST 5211 Advanced Structural 

Engineering 

Laborator y

PC 4 0 0 4 2

9. ST 5301 Earthquake Analysis 

and Design of 

Structures 

PC 3 3 0 0 3

PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 

SEMESTER I

ELECTIVE I & II 

S.No. CO URSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

1. ST 5001 Maintenance and 

Rehabilitation of 

Structures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

2. ST 5002 Prefabricated 

Struct ures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

3. ST 5003 Offshore Structures PE 3 3 0 0 3

4. ST 5004 Matrix Methods for 

Structural Analysis 

PE 3 3 0 0 38

SEMESTER II 

ELECTIVE I II & IV 

S.No. COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PER IODS L T P C

1. ST 5005 Theory of Plates PE 3 3 0 0 3

2. ST 5006 Mechanics of 

Composite Materials 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

3. ST500 7 Analysis and Design 

of Tall Buildings 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

4. ST500 8 Industrial Structures PE 3 3 0 0 3

5. ST 5009 Prestressed Concrete PE 3 3 0 0 3

6. ST50 10 Wind and Cyclone 

Effects on Structures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

SEMESTER II I

ELECTIVE V & VI 

S.No. COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

1. ST50 11 Nonlinear Ana lysis of 

Structures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

2. ST501 2 Design of Sub 

Structures PE 3 3 0 0 3

3. ST501 3 Optimization of 

Structures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

4. ST501 4 Design of Steel 

Concrete Composite 

Structures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

5. ST501 5 Design of Bridges PE 3 3 0 0 3

6. ST501 6 Design of Shell and 

Spatial Structures 

PE 3 3 0 0 3

7. ST501 7 Computer Aided 

Analysis and Design PE 4 2 0 2 3

EMPLOYABILITY ENHANCEMENT COURSES (EEC )

S.No . COURSE 

CODE COURSE TITLE CATEGORY CONTACT 

PERIODS L T P C

1. ST 5212 Practical Training I

(2 weeks) 

EEC - - - - 1

2. ST 5311 Practical Training II 

(2 weeks) 

EEC - - - - 1

3. ST 5411 Practical Training III 

(2 weeks) 

EEC - - - - 1

4. ST 5312 Seminar EEC 2 0 0 2 1

5. ST 5313 Project Work (Phase I) EEC 12 0 0 12 6

6. ST 5412 Project Work (Phase II) EEC 24 0 0 24 12 9

MA5151 ADVANCED MATHEMATICA L METHODS L T P C 

4 0 0 4

OBJECTIVES : 

 The main objective of this c ourse is to provide the student with a repertoire of mathematical 

methods that are essential to the solution of advanced problems encountered in the fields 

of applied physics and engineering. This course covers a broad spectrum of mathematical 

techniques such as Laplace Transform, Fourier Transform, Calculus of Variations, 

Conformal Mapping and Tensor Analysis. Application of these topics to the solution of 

problems in physics and engineering is stressed. 

UNIT I LAPLACE TRANSFORM TECHNIQUES FO R PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL 

EQUATIONS 12 

Laplace transform : Definitions – Properties – Transform error function – Bessel’s function - Dirac 

delta function – Unit step functions – Convolution theorem – Inverse Laplace transform : Complex 

inversion formula – Solutions to partial differential equations : Heat equation – Wave equation. 

UNIT II FOURIER TRANSFORM TECHNIQUES FOR PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL 

EQUATIONS 12 

Fourier transform : Definitions – Properties – Transform of elementary functions – Dirac delta 

function – Convolution theorem – Parseval’s identity – Solutions to partial differential equations :

Heat equation – Wave equation – Laplace and Poisson’s equations. 

UNIT III CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS 12 

Concept of variation and its propert ies – Euler’s equation – Functional dependant on first and 

higher order derivatives – Functionals dependant on functions of several independent variables –

Variational problems with moving boundaries – Isoperimetric problems – Direct methods – Ritz 

and Ka ntorovich methods. 

UNIT IV CONFORMAL MAPPING AND APPLICATIONS 12 

Introduction to conformal mappings and bilinear transformations – Schwarz Christoffel 

transformation – Transformation of boundaries in param etric form – Physical applications : Fluid 

flow and heat flow problems. 

UNIT V TENSOR ANALYSIS 12 

Summation convention – Contravariant and covariant vectors – Contraction of tensors – Inner 

product – Quotient law – Metric tensor – Christoffel symbols – Covariant differentiation – Gradient 

- Divergence and curl. 

TOTAL : 60 PERIODS 

OUTCOMES : 

After completing this course, students should demonstrate compete ncy in the following skills: 

 Application of Laplace and Fourier transforms to initial value, initial –boundary value and 

boundary value problems in Partial Differential Equations. 

 Maximizing and minimizing the functional that occur in various branches of E ngineering 

Disciplines. 

 Construct conformal mappings between various domains and use of conformal mapping in 

studying problems in physics and engineering particularly to fluid flow and heat flow 

problems. 

 Understand tensor algebra and its applications in a pplied sciences and engineering and 

develops ability to solve mathematical problems involving tensors. 

 Competently use tensor analysis as a tool in the field of applied sciences and related fields. 10 

REFERENCES : 

1. Andrews L.C. and Shivamoggi, B., "Integ ral Transforms for Engineers”, Prentice Hall of 

India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2003. 

2. Elsgolc, L.D., “Calculus of Variations", Dover Publications Inc., New York, 2007. 

3. Kay, D. C., "Tensor Calculus”, Schaum's Outline Series, Tata McGraw Hill Edition, 2014. 

4. Math ews, J. H., and Howell, R.W., “Complex Analysis for Mathematics and Engineering", 

5th Edition, Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 2006. 

5. Naveen Kumar, “An Elementary Course on Variational Problems in Calculus ", Narosa 

Publishing House, 2005. 

6. Ramaniah. G. “Tens or Analysis”, S. Viswanathan Pvt. Ltd., 1990. 

7. Saff, E.B and Snider, A.D, “Fundamentals of Complex Analysis with Applications in 

Engineering, Science and Mathematics", 3 rd Edition, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2014. 

8. Sankara Rao, K., “Introduction to Parti al Differential Equations”, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. 

Ltd., New Delhi, 1997. 

9. Spiegel, M.R., “Theory and Problems of Complex Variables and its Applications”, 

Schaum’s Outline Series, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1981. 

ST5101 ADVANCED CONCRETE STRUCTURES L T P C

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To make the student s be familiar with the limit state design of RCC beams and columns 

 To design special structures such as Deep beams, Corbels, Deep beams, and Grid floors 

 To make the students confident to design the flat slab as per Indian standard, yield line 

theory and s trip method. 

 To design the beams based on limit analysis and detail the beams, columns and joints for 

ductility .

UNIT I DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 9

Limit state design - beams, slabs and columns according to IS Codes. Calculation of deflection 

and crack width according to IS Code. interaction curve generation for axial force and bending 

UNIT II DESIGN OF SPECIAL RC ELEMENTS 9

Design of slender columns - Design of RC walls. Strut and tie method of analysis for corbels and 

deep beams , Design of corbels, Deep -beams and grid floors. 

UNIT III FLAT SLABS AND YIELD LINE BASED DESIGN 9

Design of flat slabs and flat plates accord ing to IS method – Check for shear - Design of spandrel 

beams - Yield line theory and Hillerborg’s strip method of design of slabs. 

UNIT IV INELASTIC BEHAVIOUR OF CONCRETE BEAMS AND COLUMNS 9

Inelastic behaviour of concrete beams an d Baker’s method, moment - rotation curves, ductility 

definitions, evaluation 

UNIT V DUCTILE DETAILING 9

Concept of Ductility – Detailing for ductility – Design of beams, columns for ductility - Design of 

cast -in -situ joints in frames. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course the students will have the confidence to design various 

concrete struct ures and structural elements by limit state design and detail the same for 

ductility as per codal requirements. 11 

REFERENCES: 

1. Gambhir.M. L., “Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures”, Prentice Hall of India, 2012. 

2. Purushothaman, P, “Reinforced Concrete S tructural Elements: Behaviour Analysis and 

Design”, Tata McGraw Hill, 1986 

3. Unnikrishna Pillai and Devdas Menon “Reinforced Concrete Design’, Third Edition, Tata 

McGraw Hill Publishers Company Ltd., New Delhi, 2007. 

4. Varghese, P.C, “Advanced Reinforced Concr ete Design”, Prentice Hall of India, 2005. 

5. Varghese, P.C., “Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete”, Prentice Hall of India, 2007. 

ST5102 DYNAMICS OF STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To expose the students the principles and methods of dynamic analysis of structures and 

to prepare them for designing the structures for wind, earthquake and other dynamic loads .

UNIT I PRINCIPLES OF VIBRATION ANALYSIS 9

Mathematical models of single degree of freedom systems - Free and forced vibration of SDOF 

systems, Response of SDOF to special forms of excitation, Effect of damping, Transmissibility ,

applications -ex amples related to structural engineering 

UNIT II TWO DEGREE OF FREEDOM SYSTEMS 9

Mathematical models of two degree of freedom systems, free and forced vibrations of two degree 

of freedom system s, normal modes of vibration, applications. 

UNIT III DYNAMIC RESPONSE OF MULTI -DEGREE OF FREEDOM SYSTEMS 9

Mathematical models of Multi -degree of freedom systems, orthogonality of normal modes, free and 

forced vibrations of multi degree of freedom systems , Mode superposition technique, response 

spectrum method, Applications. 

UNIT IV DYNAMIC RESPONSE OF CONTINUOUS SYSTEMS 9

Mathematical models of continuous systems , Free and forced vibration of continuous systems, 

Rayleigh – Ritz method – Formulation using Conservation of Energy – Formulation using Virtual 

Work, Applications. 

UNIT V DIRECT INTEGRATION METHODS FOR DYNAMIC RESPONSE 9

Damping in MDOF systems, Nonlinear MDOF systems, step -by -step numerical integration 

algorithms, substructure technique , Applications .

TOTAL : 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 After completion of the course the students will have the knowledge of vibration analysi s of 

systems/structures with different degrees of freedom and they know the method of 

damping the systems. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Anil K.Chopra, Dynamics of Structures, Pearson Education, 2007. 

2. Leonard Meirovitch, Elements of Vibration Analysis, McGraw Hil l, 1986, IOS Press, 2006. 

3. Mario Paz, Structural Dynamics -Theory and Computation, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 

2004. 

4. Roy R.Craig, Jr, Andrew J. Kurdila , Fundamentals of Structural Dynamics, John Wiley & 

Sons, 2011. 12 

ST5103 THEORY OF ELASTICITY AND PLASTICITY L T P C 

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To understand the concept of 3D stress, strain analysis and its applications. 

UNIT I ELASTICITY 9

Analysis of stress and strain, Equilibrium Equations - Compatibility Equations - Stress Strain 

Relationship. Generalized Hooke’s law. 

UNIT II 2D STRESS STRAIN PROBLEMS 9

Plane stress and plane strain - Simple two dimensional problems in Cartesian and Polar Co -

ordinates. 

UNIT III TORSION OF NON -CIRCULAR SECTION 9

St.Venant’s approach - Prandtl’s approach – Membrane analogy - Torsion of Thin Walled - Open 

and Closed sections -Design approach to open web section subjected to to rsion 

UNIT IV BEAMS ON ELASTIC FOUNDATIONS 9

Beams on Elastic foundation – Methods of analysis – Elastic line method – Idealization of soil 

medium – Winkler model – Infinite beams – Semi infinite and finite beams – Rigid and flexible –

Uniform Cross Section – Point load and UDL – Solution by Finite Differences. 

UNIT V PLASTICITY 9

Physical Assumptions – Yield Criteria – Failure Theorie s – Applications of Thick Cylinder – Plastic 

Stress Strain Relationship. Elasto -Plastic Problems in Bending and Torsion. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course the students will be familiar to the concept of elastic analysis 

of plane stress and plane strain problems, beams on elastic foundation and torsion on non -

circular section. 

 They will also have sufficient knowledge in various theories of failure and plasticity. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Ansel.C.Ugural and Saul.K.Fenster, ”Advanced Strength and Applied Elasticity,” Fourth 

Edition, Prentice Hall Professional technical Reference, New Jersy, 2003. 

2. Chakrabarty.J, “Theory of Plasticity”, Third Edition, Elsevier Butterworth - Heinmann – UK, 

2007. 

3. Jane Helena H, “Theory of Elasticity and Plasticity”, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2016 . 

4. Slater R.A.C, “Engineering Plasticity”, John Wiley and Son, New York, 1977. 

5. Timoshenko, S. and Goodier J.N."Theory of Elasticity", McGraw Hill Book Co., New York, 

201 0. 

ST5201 ADVANCED STEEL STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the behaviour of members and connections, analysis and design of Industrial 

buildi ngs and roofs, chimneys. Study the design of with cold formed steel and plastic 

analysis of structures. 13 

UNIT I GENERAL 9

Design of members subjected to combined forces – Design of Purlins, Louver r ails, Gable column 

and Gable wind girder – Design of simple bases, Gusseted bases and Moment Resisting Base 

Plates. 

UNIT II DESIGN OF CONNECTIONS 9

Types of connections – Welded and Bolted – Throat and Root Stress es in Fillet Welds – Seated 

Connections – Unstiffened and Stiffened seated Connections – Moment Resistant Connections –

Clip angle Connections – Split beam Connections – Framed Connections HSFG bolted 

connections .

UNIT III ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS 9

Analysis and design of different types of trusses – Analysis and design of industrial buildings –

Sway and non sway frames – Aseismic design of steel buildings. 

UNIT IV PLASTIC ANALYSIS O F STRUCTURES 9

Introduction, Shape factor, Moment redistribution, Combined mechanisms, Analysis of portal 

frames, Effect of axial force - Effect of shear force on plastic moment, Connections - Requirement 

– Moment res isting connections. Design of Straight Corner Connections – Haunched Connections 

– Design of continuous beams. 

UNIT V DESIGN OF LIGHT GAUGE STEEL STRUCTURES 9

Introduction to Direct Strength Method - Behavio ur of Compression Elements - Effective width for 

load and deflection determination – Behaviour of Unstiffened and Stiffened Elements – Design of 

webs of beams – Flexural members – Lateral buckling of beams – Shear Lag – Flange Curling –

Design of Compressi on Members – Wall Studs. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course students will be in a position to design bolted and welded 

connections in industrial structures. 

 They also know the plastic analysis and design of light gauge steel structures. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Lynn S. Beedle, Plastic Design of Steel Frames, John Wiley and Sons, 1990. 

2. Narayanan.R.et.al., T eaching Resource on Structural steel Design, INSDAG, Ministry of 

Steel Publishing, 2000. 

3. Subramanian.N, Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press, 2014. 

4. Wie Wen Yu, Design of Cold Formed Steel Structures, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1996 

ST5202 STABILITY OF STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the concept of buckling and analysis of structural elements. 

UNIT I BUCKLING OF COLUMNS 9

States of equilibrium - Classification of buckling problems - concept of equilibrium, energy, 

imperfection and vibration approaches to stability analysis - Eigen value problem. Governing 

equation fo r columns - Analysis for various boundary conditions - using Equilibrium, Energy 

methods. Approximate methods - Rayleigh Ritz, Galerkins approach - Numerical Techniques -

Finite difference method - Effect of shear on buckling. 14 

UNIT II BUCKLING O F BEAM -COLUMNS AND FRAMES 9

Theory of beam column - Stability analysis of beam column with single and several concentrated 

loads, distributed load and end couples Analysis of rigid jointed frames with and without sway –

Use of stability function to determine the critical load. 

UNIT III TORSIONAL AND LATERAL BUCKLING 9

Torsional buckling – Combined Torsional and flexural buckling - Local buckling. Buckling of Open 

Sections . Numerical s olutions. Lateral buckling of beams, pure bending of simply supported and 

cantilever beams. 

UNIT IV BUCKLING OF PLATES 9

Governing differential equation - Buckling of thin plates, various edge conditio ns -Analysis by 

equilibrium and energy approach – Finite difference method. 

UNIT V INELASTIC BUCKLING 9

Double modulus theory - Tangent modulus theory - Shanley’s model - Eccentrically loaded 

inelastic column. Inelastic buckling of plates - Post buckling behaviour of plates. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course student will know the phenomenon of buckling and they are in 

a position to ca lculate the buckling load on column, beam – column, frames and plates 

using classical and approximate methods. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Ashwini Kumar, “Stability Theory of Structures”, Allied publishers Ltd., New Delhi, 2003. 

2. Chajes, A. “Principles of Structures Stabi lity Theory”, Prentice Hall, 1974. 

3. Gambhir, “Stability Analysis and Design of Structures”, springer, New York, 2004. 

4. Simitser.G.J and Hodges D.H, ”Fundamentals of Structural Stability”, Elsevier Ltd., 2006. 

5. Timoshenko.S.P, and Gere.J.M, “Theory of Elastic Stability”, McGraw Hill Book Company, 

1963. 

ST5203 EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To learn the princip les of measurements of static and dynamic response of structures and 

carryout the analysis of results. 

UNIT I FORCES AND STRAIN MEASUREMENT 9

Choice of Experimental stress analysis methods, Errors in mea surements - Strain gauge, principle, 

types, performance and uses. Photo elasticity - principle and applications - Hydraulic jacks and 

pressure gauges – Electronic load cells – Proving Rings – Calibration of Testing Machines – Long -

term monitoring – vibrati ng wire sensors – Fibre optic sensors. 

UNIT II MEASUREMENT OF VIBRATION AND WIND FLOW 9

Characteristics of Structural Vibrations – Linear Variable Differential Transformer (LVDT) –

Transducers for velocity and acceleration meas urements. Vibration meter – Seismographs –

Vibration Analyzer – Display and recording of signals – Cathode Ray Oscilloscope – XY Plotter –

wind tunnels – Flow meters – Venturimeter – Digital data Acquisition systems. 15 

UNIT III DISTRESS MEASUREMENTS AND CO NTROL 9

Diagnosis of distress in structures – Crack observation and measurements – corrosion of 

reinforcement in concrete – Half cell, construction and use – damage assessment – controlled 

blasting for demolition – Techniques for residual stress measurements – Structural Health 

Monitoring. 

UNIT IV NON DESTRUCTIVE TESTING METHODS 9

Load testing on structures, buildings, bridges and towers – Rebound Hammer – acoustic emission 

– ultrasonic testing principles and application – Holography – use of laser for structural testing –

Brittle coating, Advanced NDT methods – Ultrasonic pulse echo, Impact echo, impulse radar 

techniques, GECOR , Ground pe netrating radar (GPR). 

UNIT V MODEL ANALYSIS 9

Model Laws – Laws of similitude – Model materials – Necessity for Model analysis – Advantages –

Applications – Types of similitude – Scale effect in models – Ind irect model study – Direct model 

study - Limitations of models – investigations – structural problems –Usage of influence lines in 

model studies. 

TOTAL : 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course students will know about measurement of strain, vibrations and 

wind blow. 

 They will be able to analyze the structure by non -destructive testing methods and model 

analysis. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Dalley .J. W and Riley. W. F, “Experimental Stre ss Analysis”, McGraw Hill Book Company, 

N.Y. 1991 

2. Ganesan.T.P, “Model Analysis of Structures”, University Press, India, 2000. 

3. Ravisankar.K.and Chellappan.A., “Advanced course on Non -Destructive Testing and 

Evaluation of Concrete Structures”, SERC, Chennai, 2007. 

4. Sadhu Singh, “Experimental Stress Analysis”, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 2006. 

5. Sirohi.R.S., Radhakrishna.H.C, “Mechanical Measurements”, New Age International (P) 

Ltd. 1997. 

ST5204 FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS OF STRUCTU RES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE : 

 To study the basics of the Finite Element Tec hnique, a numerical tool for the solution of 

different classes of problems. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION 9

Approximate solutions of boundary value problems - Methods of weighted residuals, approximate 

solution using variational method, Modified Galerkin method, Boundary conditions and general 

comments -continuity,compatibility,convergence aspects .

Basic finite element concepts - Basic ideas in a finite elemen t solution, General finite element 

solution procedure, Finite element equations using modified Galerkin method. 

UNIT II APPLICATION : AXIAL DEFORMATION OF BARS, AXIAL SPRING 

ELEMENT. 9

Natural Coordinates - Triangular Elements -Rectangular Elements - Lagrange and Serendipity 

Elements -Solid Elements - Isoparametric Formulation - Stiffness Matrix of Isoparametric Elem ents 

- Numerical Integration: One, Two and Three Dimensional - Examples. 16 

UNIT III ANALYSIS OF FRAMED STRUCTURES 9

Stiffness of Truss Member - Analysis of Truss -Stiffness of Beam Member -Finite Element Analysis 

of Continuous Beam -Plane Frame Analysis -Analysis of Grid and Space Frame – Two 

Dimensional Solids - Constant Strain Triangle -Linear Strain Triangle -Rectangular Elements -

Numerical Evaluation of Element Stiffness -Computation of Stresses, Geometric Non linearity and 

Static Condensation - Axisymmetric Element -Finite Element Formulation of Axisymmetric Element 

-Finite Element Formulation for 3 Dimensional Elements – Solution for simple frames. 

UNIT IV PLATES AND SHELLS 9

Introduction to Plate Bending Problems - Finite Element Analysis of Thin Plate -Finite Element 

Analysis of Thick Plate -Finite Element Analysis of Skew Plate - Introduction to Finite Strip Method 

-Finite Element Analysis of Shell. 

UNIT V APPLICATIONS 9

Finite Elements for Elastic Stability - Dynamic Analysis - Nonlinear, Vibration and Thermal 

Problems - Meshing and Solution Problems - Modelling and analysis using recent softwares. 

TOTAL : 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course, the students will know the concept of finite element analysis 

and enable to analyze framed structure, Plate and Shells and modify using recent 

softwares. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Bhavikatti.S.S, “Finite Element Analysis” , New Age International Publishers, 2007. 

2. Chandrupatla, R.T. and Belegundu, A.D., “Introduction to Finite Elements in Engineering”, 

Prentice Hall of India, 2007. 

3. Rao.S.S, “Finite Element Method in Engineering”, Butterworth – Heinmann, UK, 2008 

4. Logan D. L. , A First Course in the Finite Element Method, Thomson Learning, 2007. 

5. R.D .Cook, Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis, John Wiley &Sons. 

6. David Hutton, “Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis”, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing 

Company Limited , New Delhi, 2005. 

ST5211 ADVANCED STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING LABORATORY L T P C 

0 0 4 2 

LIST OF EXPERIMENTS 

1. Fabrication, casting and testing of simply supported reinforced concrete beam for str ength 

and deflection behaviour. 

2. Testing of simply supported steel beam for strength and deflection behaviour. 

3. Fabrication, casting and testing of reinforced concrete column subjected to concentric and 

eccentric loading. 

4. Dynamic Response of cantilever steel beam 

a. To determine the damping coefficients from free vibrations. 

b. To evaluate the mode shapes. 17 

5. Static cyclic testing of single bay two storied steel frames and evaluate 

a. Drift of the frame. 

b. Stiffness of the frame. 

c. Energy dissipation capacity of the frame. 

6. Non -Destructive Test on concrete 

i) Rebound hammer and ii) Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity Tester. 

LIST OF EQUIPMENTS 

1. Strong Floor 

2. Loading Frame 

3. Hydraulic Jack 

4. Load Cell 

5. Proving Ring 

6. Demec Gauge 

7. Electrical Strain Gauge with indicator 

8. Rebound Hammer 

9. Ultrasonic P ulse Velocity Tester 

10. Dial Gauges 

11. Clinometer 

12. Vibration Exciter 

13. Vibration Meter 

14. FFT Analyser 

TOTAL: 60 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this laboratory course students will be able to cast and test RC beams for 

strength and deformation behaviour. 

 They wil l be able to test dynamic testing on steel beams, static cyclic load testing of RC 

frames and non -destruction testing on concrete. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Dally J W, and Riley W F, “Experimental Stress Analysis”, McGraw -Hill Inc. New York, 

1991. 

ST5212 PRACTICAL TRAINING I (2 Weeks) L T P C 

0 0 0 1 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To train the students in the field work so as to have a firsthand knowledge of practical 

problems related to Structural Engineering in carrying out engineering tasks. 

 To develop skills in facing and solving the field problems. 

SYLLABUS: 

The students individually undertake training in reputed Industries during the summer vacati on for a 

specified period of two weeks. At the end of trai ning, a detailed report on the work done should be 

submitted within ten days from the commencement of the semester. The students will be 

evaluated through a viva -voce examination by a team of internal staff. 

OUTCOME: 

 They are trained in tackling a practi cal field/industry orientated problem related to Structural 

Engineering. 18 

ST5301 EARTHQUAKE ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the effect of earthquakes, analysis and design of earthquake resistant Structures. 

UNIT I EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION 9

Engineering Seismology (Definitions, Introduction to Seismic hazard, Earthquake Phenomenon), 

Seismotectonics and Sei smic Zoning of India, Earthquake Monitoring and Seismic 

Instrumentation, Characteristics of Strong Earthquake Motion, Estimation of Earthquake 

Parameters, Microzonation. 

UNIT II EFFECTS OF EARTHQUAKE ON STRUCTURES 9

Dynamics of Structures SDOFS MDOFS - Response Spectra - Evaluation of Earthquake Forces 

as per codal provisions - Effect of Earthquake on Different Types of Structures - Lessons Learnt 

From Past Earthquakes 

UNIT III EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF MASON RY STRUCTURES 9

Structural Systems - Types of Buildings - Causes of damage - Planning Considerations -

Philosophy and Principle of Earthquake Resistant Design - Guidelines for Earthquake Resistant 

Design - Earthquake Resistant Masonry Bu ildings - Design consideration – Guidelines. 

UNIT IV EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF RC STRUCTURES 9

Earthquake Resistant Design of R.C.C. Buildings - Material properties - Lateral load analysis –

Capacity based Design and detailing – Rigid Frames – Shear walls. 

UNIT V VIBRATION CONTROL TECHNIQUES 9

Vibration Control - Tuned Mass Dampers – Principles and application, Basic Concept of Seismic 

Base Isolation – variou s Systems - Case Studies, Important structures. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course the students will be able to understand the causes and effect of 

earthquake. 

 They will be able to design masonry and RC structures to the earthquake forces as per the 

recommendations of IS codes of practice. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Brebbia C. A.,”Earthquake Resistant Engineering Structures VIII”,WIT Press, 2011 

2. Bruce A Bolt, “Earthquakes” W H Freeman and Company, New York, 2004. 

3. Duggal S K , “Eart hquake Resistant Design of Structures”, Oxford University Press, 2007. 

4. Mohiudd in Ali Khan “Earthquake -Resistant Structures: Design, Build and Retrofit”, Elsevier 

Science & Technology, 2012 

5. Pankaj Agarwal and Manish Shrikhande, “Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures”, 

Prentice Hall of India, 2009. 

6. Paulay,T and Priestley, M.J.N., “Seismic Design of Reinforced Concrete and Masonry 

buildings”, John Wiley and Sons, 1992. 19 

ST5311 PRACTICAL TRAINING II (2 Weeks) L T P C 

0 0 0 1 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To train the students in the field work so as to have a firsthand knowledge of practical 

problems related to Structural Engineering in carrying out engineering tasks. 

 To develop skills in facing and solving the field problems. 

SYLLABUS: 

The students individually undertake tr aining in reputed Industries during the summer vacation for a 

specified period of two weeks. At the end of training, a detailed report on the work done should be 

submitted within ten days from the commencement of the semester. The students will be 

evaluate d through a viva -voce examination by a team of internal staff. 

OUTCOME: 

 They are trained in tackling a practical field/industry orientated problem related to Structural 

Engineering. 

ST5312 SEMINAR L T P C 

0 0 2 1 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To work on a specific technical topic in Structural Engineering and acquire the skills of 

written and oral presentation. 

 To acquire writing abilities for s eminars and conferences. 

SYLLABUS: 

The students will work for two hours per week guided by a group of staff members. They will be 

asked to give a presentation on any topic of their choice related to Structural Engineering and to 

engage in discussion with the audience. A brief copy of their presentation also should be 

submitted. Similarly, the students will have to present a seminar of not less than fifteen minutes 

and not more than thirty minutes on the technical topic. They will defend their presentation. 

Evaluation will be based on the technical presentation and the report and also on the interaction 

shown during the seminar. 

TOTAL: 30 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 The students will be trained to face an audience and to tackle any problem during group 

discussion in t he Interviews. 

ST5313 PROJECT WORK (PHASE I ) L T P C

0 0 12 6

OBJECTIVE: 

 To identify a specific problem for the current need of the society and collecting information 

related to the same through detailed review of literature. 

 To develop the methodology to solve the identified problem. 

 To train the students in preparing project reports and to face reviews and viva -voce 

examination. 20 

SYLLABUS: 

The student individually works on a specific to pic approved by faculty member who is familiar in 

this area of interest. The student can select any topic which is relevant to his/her specialization of 

the programme. The topic may be experimental or analytical or case studies. At the end of the 

semester, a detailed report on the work done should be submitted which contains clear definition 

of the identified problem, detailed literature review related to the area of work and methodology for 

carrying out the work. The students will be evaluated through a vi va -voce examination by a panel 

of examiners including one external examiner. 

TOTAL: 180 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of the course the students will have a clear idea of his/her area of work and they 

are in a position to carry out the remaining phase II w ork in a systematic way. 

ST5 411 PRACTICAL TRAINING II I (2 Weeks) L T P C 

0 0 0 1 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To train the students in the field work so as to have a firsthand knowledge of practical 

problems related to Structural Engineering in carrying out engineering tasks. 

 To develop skills in facing and solving the field problems. 

SYLLABUS: 

The students individually undertake training in reputed Industries during the summer vacation for a 

specifi ed period of two weeks. At the end of training, a detailed report on the work done should be 

submitted within ten days from the commencement of the semester. The students will be 

evaluated through a viva -voce examination by a team of internal staff. 

OUTCO ME: 

 They are trained in tackling a practical field/industry orientated problem related to Structural 

Engineering. 

ST5412 PROJECT WORK (PHASE II ) L T P C

0 0 24 12 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To solve the identified problem based on the formulated methodology. 

 To develop skills to analyze and discuss the test results, and make conclusions. 

SYLLABUS: 

The student should continue the phase I work on the selected topic as per the formulated 

metho dology. At the end of the semester, after completing the work to the satisfaction of the 

supervisor and review committee, a detailed report should be prepared and submitted to the head 

of the department. The students will be evaluated through based on the report and the viva -voce 

examination by a panel of examiners including one external examiner. 

TOTAL: 360 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of the project work students will be in a position to take up any challenging 

practical problem and find better soluti ons. 21 

ST5001 MAINTENANCE AND REHABILITATION OF STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the damages, repair and rehabilitation of structures. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION 9

General Consideration – Distresses monitoring – Causes of distresses – Quality assurance –

Defects due to climate, chemicals, wear and erosion – Inspection – Structural appraisal –

Economic appr aisal. 

UNIT II BUILDING CRACKS 9

Causes – diagnosis – Thermal and Shrinkage cracks – unequal loading – Vegetation and trees –

Chemical action – Founda tion movements – Remedial measures - Techniques for repair – Epoxy 

injection. 

UNIT III MOISTURE PENETRATION 9

Sources of dampness – Moisture movement from ground – Reasons for ineffective DPC – Roof 

leakage – Pitched roofs – Madras Terrace roofs – Membrane treated roofs - Leakage of Concrete 

slabs – Dampness in solid walls – condensation – hygroscopic salts – remedial treatments – Ferro 

cement overlay – Chemical coatings – Flexible and rigid coatings. 

UNIT IV DISTRESSES AND REMEDIES 9

Concrete Structures: Introduction – Causes of deterioration – Diagnosis of causes – Flow charts 

for di agnosis – Materials and methods of repair – repairing, spalling and disintegration – Repairing 

of concrete floors and pavements. 

Steel Structures : Types and causes for deterioration – preventive measures – Repair procedure –

Brittle fracture – Lamellar t earing – Defects in welded joints – Mechanism of corrosion – Design of 

protect against corrosion – Design and fabrication errors – Distress during erection. 

Masonry Structures: Discoloration and weakening of stones – Biotical treatments – Preservation –

Chemical preservatives – Brick masonry structures – Distresses and remedial measures. 

UNIT V STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING STRUCTURES 9

General principle – relieving loads – Strengthening super struc tures – plating – Conversation to 

composite construction – post stressing – Jacketing – bonded overlays – Reinforcement addition –

strengthening substructures – under pinning – Enhancing the load capacity of footing – Design for 

rehabilitation. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course students will be in a position to point out the causes of distress in 

concrete, masonry and steel structures and also they will be able to suggest the remedial 

measures. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Allen R.T and Edwards S.C, “Repair of Concrete Structures”, Blakie and Sons, UK, 1987 

2. Dayaratnam.P and Rao.R, “Maintenance and Durability of Concrete Structures”, University 

Press, India, 1997. 

3. Denison Campbell, Allen and Harold Roper, “Concrete Structures, Materials, Maintenance 

and Repair”, Longman Scientific and Technical, UK, 1991. 

4. Dodge Woodson.R,”Concrete Structures – protection, repair and rehabilitation”, Elsevier 

Butterworth – Heinmann, UK, 2009. 

5. Hand book on seismic retrofit of Building by CPWD and IIT Madras,2003. 

6. Peter H.Emmons, “Concrete Repair and Maintenance Illustrated”, Galgotia Publications 

Pvt. Ltd., 2001. 

7. Raikar, R.N., “Learning from failures - Deficiencies in Design, Construct ion and Service” –

Rand D Centre (SDCPL), Raikar Bhavan, Bombay, 1987. 22 

ST5002 PREFABRICATED STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To Study the design principles, analysis and design of elements .

UNIT I DESIGN PRINCIPLES 9

General Civil Engineering requirem ents, specific requirements for planning and layout of 

prefabrication plant. IS Code specifications. Modular co -ordination, standardization, Disuniting of 

Prefabricates, production, transportation, erection, stages of loading and code provisions, safety 

fa ctors, material properties, Deflection control, Lateral load resistance, Location and types of shear 

walls. 

UNIT II REINFORCED CONCRETE 9

Prefabricated structures - Long wall and cross -wall large panel buildings, on e way and two way 

prefabricated slabs, Framed buildings with partial and curtain walls, -Connections – Beam to 

column and column to column. 

UNIT III FLOORS, STAIRS AND ROOFS 9

Types of floor slabs, analysi s and design example of cored and panel types and two -way systems, 

staircase slab design, types of roof slabs and insulation requirements, Description of joints, their 

behaviour and reinforcement requirements, Deflection control for short term and long ter m loads, 

Ultimate strength calculations in shear and flexure. 

UNIT IV WALLS 9

Types of wall panels, Blocks and large panels, Curtain, Partition and load bearing walls, load 

transfer from floor to wall panels, vertical loads, Eccentricity and stability of wall panels, Design 

Curves, types of wall joints, their behaviour and design, Leak prevention, joint sealants, sandwich 

wall panels, approximate design of shear walls. 

UNIT V INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS AND S HELL ROOFS 9

Components of single -storey industrial sheds with crane gantry systems, R.C. Roof Trusses, Roof 

Panels, corbels and columns, wind bracing design. Cylindrical, Folded plate and hyper -

prefabricate d shells, Erection and jointing, joint design, hand book based design. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course student will have good knowledge about the prefabricated 

elements and the technologi es used in fabrication and erection. 

 They will be in a position to design floors, stairs, roofs, walls and industrial buildings, and 

various joints for the connections. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Koncz.T., Manual of Precast Concrete Construction, Vol.I II and III & IV B auverlag, GMBH, 

1971. 

2. Laszlo Mokk, Prefabricated Concrete for Industrial and Public Structures, Akademiai Kiado, 

Budapest, 2007. 

3. Lewicki.B, Building with Large Prefabricates, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam/ 

London/New York, 1998. 

4. Structural Design Manual, Precast Concrete Connection Details, Society for the Studies in 

the use of Precase Concrete, Netherland Betor Verlag, 2009. 

5. Warszawski, A., Industrialization and Robotics in Building - A managerial approach, Harper 

and Row, 1990. 23 

ST5003 OFFSHORE STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the concept of wave theories, forces and design of jacket towers, pipes and 

cables .

UNIT I WAVE THEORIES 9

Wave generation process, small, finite amplitude and nonlinear wave theories. 

UNIT II FORCES OF OFFSHORE STRUCTURES 9

Wind forces, wave forces on small bodies and large bodie s - current forces - Morison equation. 

UNIT III OFFSHORE SOIL AND STRUCTURE MODELLING 9

Different types of offshore structures, foundation modeling, fixed jacket platform structural 

modeling. 

UNIT IV ANALYSIS OF OFFSHORE STR UCTURES 9

Static method of analysis, foundation analysis and dynamics of offshore structures. 

UNIT V DESIGN OF OFFSHORE STRUCTURES 9

Design of platforms, helipads, Jacket tower, analysis and design of mooring cables and pipelines. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course students will be able to determine the forces due to ocean 

waves and analyze and design offshore structures like p latform, helipads, jackets, towers 

etc., 

REFERENCES: 

1. API RP 2A -WSD, Planning, Designing and Constructing Fixed Offshore Platforms -

Working Stress Design - API Publishing Services, 2005 

2. Chakrabarti, S.K., Handbook of Offshore Engineering by, Elsevier, 200 5. 

3. Chakrabarti, S.K., Hydrodynamics of Offshore Structures, WIT press, 2001. 

4. Dawson.T.H., Offshore Structural Engineering, Prentice Hall Inc Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 

1983. 

5. James F. Wilson , Dynamics of Offshore Structures, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2003. 

6. Reddy, D.V. and Arockiasamy, M., Offshore Structures, Vol.1 and Vol.2, Krieger Publishing 

Company, 1991. 

7. Red dy.D.V and Swamidas A.S.J.,Essential of offshore structures.CRC Press.2013 

8. Turgut Sarpkaya , Wave Forces on Offshore Structures, Ca mbridge University Press, 2010. 

ST5004 MATRIX METHODS FOR STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVES: 

 To study the concepts, characteristics and transformation of structures using matrix 

approach 

UNIT I ENERGY CONCEPTS IN STRUCTURES 9

Introduction – Strain Energy – Symmetry of The Stiffness And Flexibility Matrices – Strain Energy 

in Terms of Stiffness And Flexibility Matrices – Stiffness And Flexibility Coefficients in Terms of 

Strain Energy – Additional properties of [a] and [k] – another Interpreta tion of coefficients a ij and k ij 

– Betti’s law – Applications of Betti’s law: Forces not at the coordinates – Strain energy in systems 

and in Elements. 24 

UNIT II CHARACTERSTICS OF STRUCTURES – STIFFNESS AND FLEXIBILITY 9

Introduction – Structure with Single Coordinate - Two Coordinates -Flexibility and Stiffness Matrices 

in Coordinates - Examples -Symmetric Nature of Matrices - Stiffness and Flexibility Matrices in 

Constrained Measurements - Stiffness and Flexibility of Systems and Elements -Computing 

Di splacements and Forces form Virtual Work -Computing Stiffness and Flexibility Coefficients. 

UNIT III TRANSFORMATION OF INFORMATION IN STRUTURES 9

Determinate - Indeterminate Structures -Transformation of System Forces to Element Forces -

Element Flexibility to System Flexibility - System Displacement to Element Displacement -Element 

Stiffness to System Stiffness -Transformation of Forces and Displacements in General –Stiffness 

and Flexibility in General –Normal Coordinates and Orthogonal Transformation -Principle of 

Contregradience 

UNIT IV THE FLEXIBILITY METHOD 9

Statically Determinate Structures –Indeterminate Structures -Choice of Redundant L eading to Ill 

and Well Conditioned Matrices -Transformation to One Set of Redundant to Another -Internal 

Forces due to Thermal Expansion and Lack of Fit -Reducing the Size of Flexibility Matrix -

Application to Pin -Jointed Plane Truss -Continuous Beams -Frames -Gr ids. 

UNIT V THE STIFFNESS METHOD 9

Introduction -Development of Stiffness Method - Stiffness Matrix for Structures with zero Force at 

some Coordinates -Analogy between Flexi bility and Stiffness -Lack of Fit -Stiffness Matrix with Rigid 

Motions -Application of Stiffness Approach to Pin Jointed Plane Trusses -Continuous Beams -

Frames -Grids -Space Trusses and Frames -Introduction Only -Static Condensation Technique -

Choice of Method -Stif fness or Flexibility. 

TOTAL : 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOMES: 

 On completion of this course students will be able to use matrix approach for solving 

structural engineering problems 

 Students will have a thorough understanding of both flexibility and stiffness approach of 

analysis. 

REFERENCE S: 

1. Natarajan C and Revathi P., “Matrix Methods of Structural Analysis”, PHI Learning Private 

Limited, New Delhi, 2014 

2. Devdas Menon., “Advanced Structural Analysis”, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 

2009 

3. Pandit G.S. and Gupta S.P., “Structural Analysis -A Matrix Approach”, Tata McGraw -Hill 

PublishingCompany Limited, New Delhi, 1997. 

4. Moshe F. Rubinstein – Matrix Com puter Analysis of Structures - Prentice Hall,1969 

5. Reddy C.S., “Basic Structural Analysis”, Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Company Limited, 

New Delhi, 1997 

ST5005 THEORY OF PLATES L T P C 

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the behaviour and analysis of thin plates and the behaviour of anisotropic and 

thick plates. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION TO PLATES THEORY 9

Thin Plates with small deflection. L aterally loaded thin plates, governing differential equation, 

various boundary conditions. 25 

UNIT II RECTANGULAR PLATES 9

Rectangular plates. Simply supported rectangular plates, Navier solution and Levy's method, 

Rectan gular plates with various edge conditions, plates on elastic foundation. Moody’s chart (for 

analysis of plates with various boundary conditions/loading) 

UNIT III CIRCULAR PLATES 9

Symmetrical bending of circular plates. 

UNIT IV SPECIAL AND APPROXIMATE METHODS. 9

Energy methods, Finite difference and Finite element methods. 

UNIT V ANISOTROPIC PLATES AND THICK PLATES 9

Orthotropic plates and grids, moderately thick plates. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course students will be able to analyze different types of plates 

(rectangular and circular) under different boundary connections by various classic al 

methods and approximate methods. 

 They will also know behavior of orthotropic and thick plates and grids. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Ansel C.Ugural, ”Stresses in plate and shells”, McGraw Hill International Edition, 1999. 

2. Bairagi, “Plate Analysis”, Khanna Publishers, 1996. 

3. Bulson.P.S.,”Stability Of Flat Plates.,American Elsevier Publisher. Co.,1969. 

4. Chandrashekahara, K. Theory of Plates, University Press (India) Ltd., Hyderabad, 2001. 

5. Reddy J N, “Theory and Analysis of Elastic Plates and Shells”, McGraw Hill Book 

Compa ny, 2006. 

6. Szilard, R., “Theory and Analysis of Plates – classical and numerical methods, Prentice 

Hall Inc., 2004. 

7. Timoshenko.S.P, and Krieger S.W. “Theory of Plates and Shells”, McGraw Hill Book 

Company, New York, 2003. 

ST5006 MECHANICS OF COMPOSITE MATERIALS L T P C 

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the behaviour of composite materials and to investigate the failure and fracture 

characteristics. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION 9

Introduction to Composites, Classifying composite materials, commonly used fiber and matrix 

constituents, Composite Construction, Properties of Unidirectional Long Fiber Composites and 

Short Fiber Composites. 

UNIT II STRESS STRAIN REL ATIONS 9

Concepts in solid mechanics, Hooke’s law for orthotropic and anisotropic materials, Linear 

Elasticity for Anisotropic Materials, Rotations of Stresses, Strains, Residual Stresses 

UNIT III ANALYSIS OF LAMINA TED COMPOSITES 9

Governing equations for anisotropic and orthotropic plates. Angle -ply and cross ply laminates –

Static, Dynamic and Stability analysis for Simpler cases of composite plates, Interlaminar 

stresses. 26 

UNI T IV FAILURE AND FRACTURE OF COMPOSITES 9

Netting Analysis, Failure Criterion, Maximum Stress, Maximum Strain, Fracture Mechanics of 

Composites, Sandwich Construction. 

UNIT V APPLICATIONS AND DESIGN 9

Metal and Ceramic Matrix Composites, Applications of Composites, Composite Joints, Design with 

Composites, Review, Environmental Issues 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course students wil l have sufficient knowledge on behavior of various 

composite materials and will have an idea of failure and fracture mechanisms. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Agarwal.B.D., Broutman.L.J., and Chandrashekara.K. “Analysis and Performance of Fiber 

Composites”, John -Wiley and Sons, 2006. 

2. Daniel.I.M., and Ishai.O, “Engineering Mechanics of Composite Materials”, Oxford 

University Press, 2005. 

3. Hyer M.W., and White S.R., “Stress Analysis of Fiber -Reinforced Composite Materials”, 

D.Estech Publications Inc., 2009 

4. Jones R.M., “Mechan ics of Composite Materials”, Taylor and Francis Group 1999. 

5. Mukhopadhyay.M, “Mechanics of Composite Materials and Structures”, Universities Press, 

India, 2005. 

ST500 7 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF TALL BUILDINGS L T P C

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the behaviour, analysis and design of tall structures. 

UNIT I LOADING AND DESIGN PRIN CIPLES 9

Loading - sequential loading, Gravity loading, Wind loading, Earthquake loading, - Equivalent 

lateral force, modal analysis - combination of loading, – Static and Dynamic approach - Analytical 

and wind tunnel experimental methods - Design philosophy - working stress method, limit state 

method and plastic design. 

UNIT II BEHAVIOUR OF VARIOUS STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS 9

Factors affecting growth, height and structural form. High rise behavio ur, Rigid frames, braced 

frames, In filled frames, shear walls, coupled shear walls, wall -frames, tubulars, cores, outrigger -

braced and hybrid mega systems. 

UNIT III ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 9

Modeling for approximat e analysis, Accurate analysis and reduction techniques, Analysis of 

buildings as total structural system considering overall integrity and major subsystem interaction, 

Analysis for member forces, drift and twist - Computerized three dimensional analysis –

Assumptions in 3D analysis – Simplified 2D analysis. 

UNIT IV STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS 9

Sectional shapes, properties and resisting capacity, design, deflection, cracking, prestressing, 

shear flow, Design for different ial movement, creep and shrinkage effects, temperature effects and 

fire resistance. 27 

UNIT V STABILITY ISSUES 9

Overall buckling analysis of frames, wall -frames, Approximate methods, second or der effects of 

gravity of loading, P -Delta analysis, simultaneous first -order and P -Delta analysis, Translational, 

Torsional instability, out of plumb effects, stiffness of member in stability, effect of foundation 

rotation. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course students will be able to know the behavior of tall buildings due 

to various types of loads. 

 They will be able to analyze and design such buildings by approximate, accurate and 

simplified met hods. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Beedle.L.S., “Advances in Tall Buildings”, CBS Publishers and Distributors, Delhi, 1986. 

2. Bryan Stafford Smith and Alexcoull, “Tall Building Structures - Analysis and Design”, John 

Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2005. 

3. Gupta.Y.P.,(Editor), Proceedi ngs of National Seminar on High Rise Structures - Design 

and Construction Practices for Middle Level Cities, New Age International Limited, New 

Delhi,1995. 

4. Lin T.Y and Stotes Burry D, “Structural Concepts and systems for Architects and 

Engineers”, John Wil ey, 1988. 

5. Taranath B.S., “Structural Analysis and Design of Tall Buildings”, McGraw Hill, 1988. 

ST5008 INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES L T P C

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the requirements, planning and design of Industrial structures .

UNIT I PLANNING AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 9

Classification of Industries and Industrial structures - planning for Layout Requirements regarding 

Lighting, Ventilation and Fire Safety - Protection against noise and vibration - Guidelines of 

Factories Act. 

UNIT II INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS 9

Steel and RCC - Gantry Girder, Crane Girders - Design of Corbels and Nibs – Design of Staircase. 

UNIT III POWER PLANT STRUCTURES 9

Types of power plants – Containment structures - Cooling Towers - Bunkers and Silos - Pipe 

supporting structures 

UNIT IV TRANSMISSION LINE STRUCTURES AND CHIMNEYS 9

Analysis and design of steel monopoles, transmission line towers – Sag and Tension calculations, 

Meth ods of tower testing – Design of s elf supporting and guyed chimney, Design of Chimney 

bases. 

UNIT V FOUNDATION 9

Design of foundation for Towers, Chimneys and Cooling Towers - Machine Foundation - Design of 

Turbo Generator Foundation. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 28 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course student will be able to plan industrial structures for functional 

requirements. 

 They will be able to design various structures such as Bun kers, Silos, Cooling Towers, 

Chimneys, and Transmission Towers with required foundations. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Jurgen Axel Adam, Katharria Hausmann, Frank Juttner, Klauss Daniel, Industrial Buildings: 

A Design Manual, Birkhauser Publishers, 2004. 

2. Manohar S.N, Tall Chimneys - Design and Construction, Tata McGraw Hill, 1985 

3. Santhakumar A.R. and Murthy S.S., Transmission Line Structures, Tata McGraw Hill,1992. 

4. Srinivasulu P and Vaidyanathan.C, Handbook of Machine Foundations, Tata McGraw Hill, 

1976. 

ST5009 PRESTRESSED CONCRETE L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 Principle of prestressing, analysis and design of prestressed concrete structures .

UNIT I PRINCIPLES OF PRESTR ESSING 9

Basic concepts of Prestressing - Types and systems of prestressing - Need for High Strength 

materials, Analysis methods, losses of prestress – Short and Long term deflections – Cable 

layouts. 

UNIT II DESIGN OF FLEXURAL MEMBERS 9

Behaviour of flexural members, determination of ultimate flexural strength – Various Codal 

provisions - Design of flexural members, Design for shear, bond and torsion. Transfer of prestress 

– Box gi rders. 

UNIT III DESIGN OF CONTINUOUS AND CANTILEVER BEAMS 9

Analysis and design of continuous beams - Methods of achieving continuity - concept of linear 

transformations, concordant cable profile and gap cables – Anal ysis and design of cantilever 

beams. 

UNIT IV DESIGN OF TENSION AND COMPRESSION MEMBERS 9

Design of tension members - application in the design of prestressed pipes and prestressed 

concrete cylindrical water tanks - Design o f compression members with and without flexure - its 

application in the design piles, flag masts and similar structures. 

UNIT V DESIGN OF COMPOSITE MEMBERS 9

Composite beams - analysis and design, ultimate strength - their applications. Partial prestressing 

- its advantages and applications. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course students will have sufficient knowledge on various methods of 

prestressing and the concepts of partial pre -stressing. 

 They will be in a position to design beams, pipes, water tanks, posts and similar structures. 

REFE RENCES: 

1. Arthur H. Nilson, “Design of Prestressed Concrete”, John Wiley and Sons Inc, New York, 

2004. 29 

2. Krishna Raju, “Prestressed Concrete”, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co., New Delhi, 2008. 

3. Lin.T.Y.,and Burns.H “Design of Prestressed Concrete Structures”, John Wiley and Sons 

Inc, New York, 2009. 

4. Rajagopalan.N, “Prestressed Concrete”, Narosa Publications, New Delhi, 2008. 

5. Sinha.N.C.and.Roy.S.K, “Fundamentals of Prestressed Concrete”, S.Chand and Co., 1998. 

ST5010 WIND AND CYCLONE EFFECTS ON STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the concept of wind and cyclone effects for the analysis and design of structures. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION 9

Introduction, Types of wind – Characteristics of wind – Wind velocity, Method of measurement, 

variation of speed with height, shape factor, aspect ratio, drag effects - Dynamic nature of wind –

Pressure and suctions - Spectral stud ies, Gust factor. 

UNIT II WIND TUNNEL STUDIES 9

Wind Tunnel Studies, Types of tunnels, - Prediction of acceleration – Load combination factors –

Wind tunnel data analysis – Calculation of Period and damping value for wind design - Modeling 

requirements, Aero dynamic and Aero -elastic models. 

UNIT III EFFECT OF WIND ON STRUCTURES 9

Classification of structures – Rigid and Flexible – Effect of wind on structures - Static and dynamic 

effects on Tall buildings – Chimneys. 

UNIT IV DESIGN OF SPECIAL STRUCTURES 9

Design of Structures for wind loading – as per IS, ASCE and NBC code provisions – design of Tall 

Buildi ngs – Chimneys – Transmission towers and steel monopoles – Industrial sheds. 

UNIT V CYCLONE EFFECTS 9

Cyclone effect on – low rise structures – sloped roof structures - Tall buildings. Effect of cyclone on 

claddings – design of cladding – use of code provisions in cladding design – Analytical procedure 

and modeling of cladding. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course, students will be able to design high rise structures subjected 

wind load, even structures exposed to cyclone. 

 Students will be conversant with various code provisions for the design of structures for 

wind load. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Cook.N.J., “The Designer's Guide to Wind Loading of Building Structures”, Butterworths, 

1989. 

2. Kolousek.V, Pirner.M, Fischer.O and Naprstek.J, “Wind Effects on Civil Engineering 

Structures”, Elsevier Publications, 1984 

3. Lawson T.V., “Wind Effects on Building Vol. I and II”, Applied Science Publishers, London, 

1980. 

4. Peter Sachs, “Wind Forces in Engine ering”, Pergamon Press, New York, 1978. 30 

ST5011 NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the concept of nonlinear behaviour and analysis of elements and simple 

structures. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION TO NONLINEAR ANALYSIS 9

Material nonlinearity, geome tric nonlinearity ; statically determinate and statically indeterminate bar 

systems of uniform and variable thickness. 

UNIT II INELASTIC ANALYSIS OF FLEXURAL MEMBERS 9

Inelastic analysis of uniform and vari able thickness members subjected to small deformations; 

inelastic analysis of bars of uniform and variable stiffness members with and without axial 

restraints 

UNIT III VIBRATION THEORY AND ANALYSIS OF FLEXURAL MEMBERS 9

Vibration t heory and analysis of flexural members; hysteretic models and analysis of uniform and 

variable stiffness members under cyclic loading 

UNIT IV ELASTIC AND INELASTIC ANALYSIS OF PLATES 9

Elastic and inelastic analysis of uniform and variable thickness plates 

UNIT V NONLINEAR VIBRATION AND INSTABILITY 9

Nonlinear vibration and Instabilities of elastically supported beams. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course student will have enough knowledge on inelastic and vibration 

analysis of Flexural members. 

 Also they will know the difference between elastic and inelastic analysis of plates and 

Instabilities of elastically supported bea ms. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Fertis, D.G, Non -linear Mechanics, CRC Press, 1999. 

2. Reddy.J.N, Non -linear Finite Element Analysis, Oxford University Press, 2008. 

3. Sathyamoorthy.M, Nonlinear Analysis of Structures, CRC Press, 2010. 

ST5012 DESIGN OF SUB STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVES: 

 To gain familiarity with different types of foundation. 

 To expose the students to the design of shallow foundations and deep foundations. 

 To understand the concepts of designing well, mac hine and special foundations. 

UNIT I SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS 9

Soil investigation – Basic requirements of foundation – Types and selection of foundations. 

Bearing capacity of soil - plate load test – Design of reinforced concrete isolated, strip, combined 

and strap footings – mat foundation. 31 

UNIT II PILE FOUNDATIONS 9

Introduction – Types of pile foundations – load carrying capacity - pile load test – structural design 

of straight piles –configuration of piles - different shapes of piles cap – structural design of pile cap. 

UNIT III WELL FOUNDATIONS 9

Types of well foundation – Grip length – load carrying capacity – construction of wells – Failures 

and Remedies – Design of well foundation – Lateral stability. 

UNIT IV MACHINE FOUNDATIONS 9

Introduction – Types of machine foundation – Basic principles of design of machine foundation –

Dynamic properties of soil – vibration analysis of machine foundation – Design of foundation for 

Recip rocating machines and Impact machines – Reinforcement and construction details –

vibration isolation. 

UNIT V SPECIAL FOUNDATIONS 9

Foundation on expansive soils – choice of foundat ion – under -reamed pile foundation. Foundation 

for concrete Towers, chimneys – Design of anchors - Reinforced earth retailing walls. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOMES: 

 On completion of this course students will be able to select appropriate foundation type 

base d on available soil conditions. 

 They will be in a position to determine the load carrying capacity of each type of 

foundation. 

 They will gain thorough knowledge about the design of reinforced concrete shallow 

foundations, pile foundations, well foundations , and machine foundations. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Bowles .J.E., “Foundation Analysis and Design”, McGraw Hill Publishing co., New York, 

1997. 

2. Swamy Saran, Analysis and Design of substructures, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. 

Ltd., 2006. 

3. Tomlinson.M.J, “Foundation Design and Construction”, Longman, Sixth Edition, New Delhi, 

1995. 

4. Varghese.P.C, “Design of Reinforced Concrete Foundations” – PHI learning private limited, 

New Delhi – 2009. 

ST5013 OPTIMIZATION OF STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the optimization methodologies applied to structural engineering 

UNIT I BASIC PRINCIPLES AND CLASSICAL OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES 9

Definition - Objective Function; Constraints - Eq uality and inequality - Linear and non -linear, 

Side, Non -negativity, Behaviour and other constraints - Design space - Feasible and infeasible 

- Convex and Concave - Active constraint - Local and global optima. Differential calculus -

Optimali ty criteria - Single variable optimization - Multivariable optimization with no constraints 

- (Lagrange Multiplier method) - with inequality constraints (Khun - Tucker Criteria). 32 

UNIT II LINEAR AND NON -LINEAR PROGRAMMING 9

LINEAR PROGRAMMING: Formulation of problems - Graphical solution - Analytical 

methods - Standard form - Slack, surplus and artificial variables - Canonical form - Basic 

feasible solution - simplex method - Two phase method - Penalty method - Duality theory -

Primal - Dual algorithm. 

NON LINEAR PROGRAMMING: One Dimensional minimization methods: Unidimensional -

Unimodal function - Exhaustive and unrestricted search - Dichotomous search - Fibonacci 

Method - Golden section method - Interpolation methods. Unconstrained optimization 

Techniques. 

UNIT III GEOMETRIC PROGRAMMING 9

Posynomial - degree of difficulty - reducing G.P.P to a set of simultaneous equations -

Unconstrained and constrained problems with zero difficulty - Concept of solving problems with 

one degree of difficulty. 

UNIT IV DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING 9

Bellman’s principle of optimality - Representation o f a multistage decision problem - concept 

of sub -optimization problems using classical and tabular methods. 

UNIT V STRUCTURAL APPLICATIONS 9

Methods for optimal design of structural elements, continuous b eams and single storied 

frames using plastic theory - Minimum weight design for truss members - Fully stressed 

design - Optimization principles to design of R.C. structures such as multistorey buildings, 

water tanks and bridges. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course students will have sufficient knowledge on various 

optimization techniques like linear programming, non -linear programming, geometric and 

dynamic programming and they will also in a position to design various structural elements 

for minimum weight. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Iyengar.N.G.R and Gupta.S.K, “Structural Design Optimization”, Affiliated East West Press 

Ltd, New Delhi, 1997 

2. Rao,S.S. “Optimization theory and applications”, Wiley Eastern (P) Ltd., 1984 

3. Spunt, “Opti mization in Structural Design”, Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics 

Services, Prentice -Hall, New Jersey 1971 .

4. Uri Krish, “Optimum Structural Design”, McGraw Hill Book Co. 1981 

ST5014 DESIGN OF STEEL CONCRETE COMPOSITE STRUCT URES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To develop an understanding of the behaviour and design concrete composite elements 

and structures. 

UNIT I INTRODUCTION 9

Introduction to steel - concrete composite construction – Codes – Composite action –

Serviceability and Construction issues in design. 33 

UNIT II DESIGN OF COMPOSITE MEMBERS 9

Design of composite beams, slabs, columns, beam – columns - Design of composite trusses. 

UNIT III DESIGN OF CONNECTIONS 9

Shear connectors – Types – Design of connections in composite structures – Design of shear 

connectors – Partial shear interaction. 

UNIT IV COMPOSITE BOX GIRDER BRIDGES 9

Introduction - behaviour of box girder bridges - design concepts. 

UNIT V CASE STUDIES 9

Case studies on s teel - concrete composite construction in buildings - seismic behaviour of 

composite structures. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this cours e students will be in a position to design composite beams, 

columns, trusses and box -girder bridges including the related connections. 

 They will get exposure on case studies related to steel -concrete constructions of buildings. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Johnson R.P., “ Composite Structures of Steel and Concrete Beams, Slabs, Columns and 

Frames for Buildings”, Vol.I, Blackwell Scientific Publications, 2004. 

2. Oehlers D.J. and Bradford M.A., “Composite Steel and Concrete Structural Members, 

Fundamental behaviour”, Pergamon press, Oxford, 1995. 

3. Owens.G.W and Knowles.P, ”Steel Designers Manual”, Steel Concrete Institute(UK), 

Oxford Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1992. 

ST5015 DESIGN OF BRIDGES L T P C

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 To study the loads, forces on bridges and design of several types of bridges. 

UNIT I GENERAL INTRODUCTION AND SHORT SPAN RC BRIDGES 9

Types of bridges and loading standards - Choice of type - I.R.C. specifications for road bridges –

Design of RCC solid slab bridges - analysis and design of slab culverts , Tee beam and slab 

bridges. 

UNIT II LONG SPAN RC BRIDGES 9

Design principles of continuous girder bridges, box girder bridges, balanced cantilever bridges –

Arch bridges – Box culverts – Segmental bridges. 

UNIT III PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BRIDGES 9

Flexu ral and torsional parameters – Courbon’s theory – Distribution co -efficient by exact analysis –

Design of girder section – maximum and minimum prestressing forces – Eccentricity – Live load 

and dead load shear forces – Cable Zone in girder – check for stre sses at various sections –

check for diagonal tension – Diaphragms – End block – short term and long term deflections. 

UNIT IV STEEL BRIDGES 9

General – Railway loadings – dynamic effect – Railway culvert with s teel beams – Plate girder 

bridges – Box girder bridges – Truss bridges – Vertical and Horizontal stiffeners. 34 

UNIT V BEARINGS AND SUBSTRUCTURES 9

Different types of bearings – Design of bearings – Design of piers and abutme nts of different types 

– Types of bridge foundations – Design of foundations. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 At the end of this course students will be able to design different types of RCC bridges, 

Steel bridges and pre -stressed concrete bridges with the bearings and substructures. 

REFERENCES: 

1. Jagadeesh.T.R. and Jayaram.M.A., “Design of Bridge Structures”, Prentice Hall of India 

Pvt. Ltd. 2004. 

2. Johnson Victor, D. “Essentials of Bridge Engineering”, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. New 

Delhi, 2001. 

3. Ponnuswamy , S., “Bridge Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008. 

4. Raina V.K.” Concrete Bridge Practice” Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company, New Delhi, 

1991. 

ST5016 DESIGN OF SHELL AND SPATI AL STRUCTURES L T P C 

3 0 0 3 

OBJECTIVE: 

 Study the behaviour and design of shells, folded plates, space frames and application of 

FORMIAN software. 

UNIT I CLASSIFICATION OF SHELLS 9

Classification of shells, types of she lls, structural action, - Design of circular domes, conical roofs, 

circular cylindrical shells by ASCE Manual No.31. application to design of shell roofs of water 

tanks(membrane analyses) 

UNIT II FOLDED PLATES 9

Folded Plate structures, structural behaviour, types, design by ACI - ASCE Task Committee 

method – pyramidal roof. 

UNIT III INTRODUCTION TO SPACE FRAME 9

Space frames - configuration - types o f nodes - Design Philosophy - Behaviour. 

UNIT IV ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 9

Analysis of space frames – Design of Nodes – Pipes - Space frames – Introduction to Computer 

Aided Design. 

UNIT V SPECIAL METHODS 9

Application of Formex Algebra, FORMIAN for generation of configuration. 

TOTAL: 45 PERIODS 

OUTCOME: 

 On completion of this course students will be able to analyze and design various type s of 

shells, folded plates and space frames manually and also using computer Aided design 

and software packages. 35 

REFERENCES: 

1. ASCE Manual No.31, Design of Cylindrical Shells. 

2. Billington.D.P, “Thin Shell Concrete Structures”, McGraw Hill Book Co., New York, 1982. 

3. Ramasamy, G.S., “Design and Construction of Concrete Shells Roofs”, CBS Publishers, 

1986. 

4. Subramanian.N ,”Principles of Space Structures”, Wheeler Publishing Co. 1999. 

5. Varghese.P.C., Design of Reinforced Concrete Shells and Folded Plates, PHI Learning 

Pvt. Ltd., 2010. 

ST5017 COMPUTER AIDED ANALYSIS AND DESIGN L T P C 

2 0 2 3 

OBJECTIVES: 

 To learn the principles of computer graphics, struct ural analysis, structural design, Finite 

Element Analysis, Optimization and Artificial Intelligence supported by software tools 

THEORY 

UNIT I COMPUTER GRAPHICS 6+6 

Graphic primitives – Transformations – Basics of 2 D drafting – Modelling of curves and surfaces –

Wire frame modelling – Solid Modelling - Graphic standards - Drafting Software packages . 

UNIT II STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 6+6 

Computer method of struct ural analysis – Simulation and Analysis of steel sections I, channel and 

Angle –PEB Elements – RCC and Composite members - Nonlinear Analysis through software 

packages 

UNIT III STRUCTURAL DESIGN 6+6 

Computer Aided De sign of Steel and RC structural elements – Detailing of reinforcement –

Detailed Drawing . 

UNIT IV OPTIMIZATION 6+6 

Introduction to Optimization – Applications of Linear pro gramming – Simplex Algorithm – Post 

Optimality Analysis – Project scheduling – CPM and PERT Applications. 

UNIT V ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 6+6 

Introduction – Heuristic Research – Knowledge based Expert Systems – Architecture and 

Applications – Rules and Decision tables – Inference Mechanisms – Simple Applications – Genetic 

Algorithm and Applications – Principles of Neural Network – Expert system shells. 

PRACTICAL 

LIST OF EXERCISES 

1. 2-D Frame Modelling and Analysis. 

2. 3 – D Frame Modelling and Analysis. 

3. Non Linear Analysis using Design software. 

4. Design and Detailing of Structural Elements. 

5. Simulation and Analysis of steel beam using FEA software. 

6. Simulation and Analysis of R.C.Beam using FEA software. 

7. Simu lation and Analysis of Composite element s using FEA software. 

8. Eigen Value Buckling analysis using FEA software. 

TOTAL ( L : 30 P :30) : 60 PERIODS 36 

OUTCOMES: 

 On completion of this course students will be familiar and will have sufficient knowledge on 

the concepts and working principle of various structural engineering softwares 

REFERENCES: 

1. Krishnamoorthy C.S and Rajeev S., “Computer Aided Design”, Narosa Publishing House, 

New Delhi, 1991. 

2 GrooverM.P.and Zimmers E.W. Jr.," CAD/CAM, Computer Aided Des ign and 

Manufacturing", Prentice Hall of India Ltd, New Delhi, 1993. 

3. Harrison H.B., “Structural Analysis and Design Vol.I and II”, Pergamon Press, 1991 

4. Rao. S.S., "Optimisation Theory and Applications ", Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi, 

2009. 

5. Richard Forsyth (Ed.), “Expert System Principles and Case Studies”, Chapman and Hall, 

1996. 

6. Shah V.L. “Computer Aided Design in Reinforced Concrete” Structural Publishers, 2014.

